EDU/WKP(2024)11  51 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Figure 4.8. Screenshot from VESIP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: In VESIP, players embody the avatar of a student in a school, who engages in several socially challenging 
situations throughout two virtual school days. Players are asked to interpret the intention of other characters, 
decide on a course of action to resolve conflicts and state how confident they feel about their own ability to 
pursue these solutions. Students indicate their responses either through multiple choice or slider-scale response 
options. Each option plays out as an animated visualization of the option. Each dialogue choice or course of 
action is associated with different scores for social information processing.  
Source: Adapted from (Russo-Ponsaran et al., 2021[140]), “Psychometric properties of Virtual Environment for 
Social Information Processing, a social information processing simulation assessment for children”, Social 
Development, Vol. 30/3, pp. 615-640, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/sode.12512  
For analysis, children’s performance is scored according to their ability to perceive the 
actions and intentions of others correctly and the preference for prosocial behaviours when 
faced with challenging situation, providing an overall score for their Social problem-
solving abilities. Regarding the game’s psychometrics, internal consistency and test-retest 
reliability were considered good. Moreover, convergent validity was also positively 
verified by the correlations between the performance in the game and the results from other 
measurements on Social problem-solving skills, as well as from teacher reports on students’ 
social behaviours. Additionally, researchers found a positive correlation between Social 
problem-solving performance in the game and better academic competences, while noting 
that  estimations from teachers were used to indicate academic competences rather than 
more objective academic test scores (Russo-Ponsaran et al., 2021[140]). 
4.3.6. Adaptable games and future directions 
Some games do not fit the typical paradigm for assessing SES, while they nevertheless 
offer interesting concepts or mechanics which can be used as inspiration, or even directly 
adapted, for more applicable purposes. Simoland is such an example. It is a simple 2D 
game initially designed to assess real-life relationship satisfaction (Schönbrodt and 
Asendorpf, 2011[141]), but that has been subsequently modified to assess attachment anxiety 
and attachment avoidance (Schönbrodt and Asendorpf, 2012[142]), as well as feelings of 
loneliness (Luhmann et al., 2015[143]). Such an expansion of evaluated psychological 
dimensions is demonstrative of the game’s significant level of adaptability in its design and 
mechanics. In this game, the player embodies a blob, a very simple organism, and is 
prompted to interact with a similar creature, who, in the context of the game, represents a 
romantic partner. Towards this virtual partner, players can select various actions and verbal 
requests, whenever they desire and how often they desire. These options are not 
dichotomous, so that players can explore a great variability of behaviours, contributing to 
