10  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
wording of the questionnaire items and the many decades of testing and validation. Self-
reports present the advantage of allowing children and adolescents to introspectively access 
much more information, and more nuanced, about themselves than what other respondents 
can provide, such as parents or teachers (Wigelsworth et al., 2010[11]). This might be 
particularly beneficial to assess skills that are less dependent on interactions with others, 
such as Self-awareness, Self-efficacy or Curiosity. However, such an ability to introspect 
and to develop a self-concept are subject to neurocognitive development, and younger 
children, when compared to adolescents, are likely less able to provide accurate responses 
about themselves (Wigelsworth et al., 2010[11]).  
Also, it is widely recognised that self-reports suffer from significant levels of biases and 
limitations, including social desirability bias, immediacy bias, acquiescence bias, memory 
bias and reference bias. Social desirability bias occurs when children provide answers they 
consider to be socially desirable. For example, when asked whether they consider 
themselves hardworking or whether they care about others, children might be tempted to 
opt for a higher level of agreement with such statements as a response to social pressure or 
to align with perceived social expectations of themselves or of others (West et al., 2016[12]). 
The immediacy bias refers to children having an appreciation of their behaviour and their 
abilities based on recent events rather than a more accurate judgement of cumulative 
experiences (Wigelsworth et al., 2010[11]). Further, the acquiescence bias is the tendency of 
some individuals to consistently respond to items in a questionnaire in either a positive 
(agreement) or negative (disagreement) way, regardless of their actual content. Of note, 
younger children, when compared to adolescents and even more to adults, and those with 
lower educational attainment, are much more prone to suffer from this particular bias (Primi 
et al., 2020[13]). 
Researchers also point to possible mismatches between self-reported behaviour and actual 
behavioural actions, since questionnaires rely on memories for past events, which can 
obviously suffer from reliability and consistency issues. Moreover, different internal 
understandings of what constitutes good or poor behaviours, for example in statements “I 
am good at…”, might lead children to under or overestimate their own abilities or traits 
(Snow et al., 2016[14]). Related to this is the reference bias, regarded as the different implicit 
standards of comparison that influence individual responses. For example, when 
confronted with the statement “I am a hardworking student”, children must conceptualise 
that ideal representation of a hardworking person in order to place themselves against that 
image. Children with high standards, those raised in strict households or those studying in 
elite schools might have very different practical understandings of what it means to work 
hard, regarding homework completion, academic performance or hours of study. Such 
frameworks are, of course, dependent on internal and external pressures and different 
children will have different frameworks, and different responses, when responding to the 
same questionnaire, even if their real behaviour is in fact similar (West et al., 2016[12]). It 
is worth noting that the reference bias can occur at several levels, such as at a country level, 
for example with different references across different cultures, but also at a classroom level, 
as students typically assess their skills relatively to those of their classmates. When 
analysing self-reported questionnaires, this can artificially inflate differences across 
students who have objectively similar skills. 
Lastly, self-reports usually focus on typical behaviours even though questionnaire items 
can be worded to tap into maximal capabilities (Wigelsworth et al., 2010[11]). The maximal 
behaviours, which better align with the concept of skill (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and 
Linzarini, 2023[2]), benefit from a direct assessment paradigm that complements and 
expands beyond self-perceived and self-report abilities to focus on actual actions, choices, 
behaviours and performances of individuals, manifested in practical and contextualised 
situations. It should be said that, unlike questionnaires, these direct measurements on 
