54  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Some authors have directly associated HRV with the concept of resilience, defining 
resilience a multidimensional construct and a dynamic mental process where an individual 
displays a functional adaptation to stressful stimuli in order to preserve its integrity and 
stability. Indeed, these authors report diverse evidence that an ample HRV is consistently 
associated with a better capability to regulate and adapt psychophysiological responses. In 
particular, higher HRV was associated with better abilities in reappraisal and emotional 
regulation strategies when people were confronted with stress-inducing tasks. Additionally, 
a dynamic HRV was also related to more functional neurocognitive strategies when dealing 
with self-control tasks involving stressful stimuli. HRV could, thus, be considered a reliable 
biomarker for mental resilience, stress resistance and emotional regulation (Perna et al., 
2020[151]). HRV data can also be used in a more advanced way in order to assess and 
improve stress resistance abilities, with the application of biofeedback (Dormal, Vermeulen 
and Mejias, 2020[150]). Through biofeedback, a non-invasive technique, individuals can be 
informed about their physiological state and, by making a dynamic use of that immediate 
information, they can exert voluntary control over their own autonomic activity. This way, 
they can regulate their breathing and enhance heart-brain synchronisation, which leads to 
a more efficient mental health state and an improvement in performance. 
Some games have thoroughly integrated such biofeedback mechanisms into their gameplay 
and, despite not being appropriate, in their current design and/or mechanics, to assess SES 
in children, they offer inventive ideas which can also be adapted for future assessments. 
Such is the case of Nevermind, a game with horror elements designed to test Emotion 
regulation in adults, using a principle of heart rate biofeedback (Lobel et al., 2016[152]). In 
this game, using first-person perspective, players embody a therapist from the future, who 
enters the minds of patients suffering from psychological distress and the goal is to travel 
through the mind of the patient and complete the level by finding the cause of the trauma 
or anxiety. The distinct element of this game lies with its biofeedback mechanism, since 
the horror-themed visual setting of the game is designed to be disturbing to players, causing 
their heart rate to increase, which is used as a physiology input in the game itself. Therefore, 
as players get stressed and their heart rate increases, the game system reacts by becoming 
more hostile and difficult, namely by matching the player’s stress level with a screen 
increasingly obscured by static or having elements in the environment attacking the 
player’s character. The way to overcome this hostility and proceed with solving the puzzles 
in the game is to actively exercise emotional regulation, remaining calm in the face of these 
horror-themed stimuli, so the player’s own heart rate is lowered which, in turn, forces the 
game to readjust and become less hostile to the player. In fact, beyond a simple 
measurement of HRV, researchers considered more subtle indicators of emotional 
regulation, by considering the speed of recovery from high to lower cardiac frequencies or 
the frequency of strong drops in heart rate variability. These can be more informative about 
each individual’s reactions to the stimuli and their own strategies to overcome the hostility 
in the game. The researchers also found a correlation between an in-game emotion 
regulation strategy of reappraisal and real-life behaviours, where players who actively 
employ this emotional strategy in their daily lives were more able to counteract the game’s 
hostile environments (Lobel et al., 2016[152]). Such finding offers an important hint for 
construct validity. For other strategies, such as seeking active resolution, rumination or 
suppression, no behavioural correlations were found.  
As it is self-evident, this game is not appropriate for children nor is it enough developed to 
constitute a solid assessment tool for emotional regulation, as other psychometric 
validations are missing (for these reasons, it is not part of our main review). However, the 
principle of biofeedback, having the game incorporating and actively reacting to the 
player’s internal states, prompting the player to readjust in turn, is an immersive feature 
that contributes to a sense of realism where emotional skills can be maximally measured. 
