38  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
hand, product-oriented assessments involve evaluating actual creative products, 
particularly in fields that hold significant relevance and complexity, such as music and 
design. This approach is lauded for providing data with high ecological validity because 
the combination of expert assessment and relevant, complex scenarios is regarded as highly 
effective. However, it is also considered much more costly in time and resources, and less 
suited for scalability. For this reason, we believe that exploring methods that integrate the 
scalability of process-oriented assessments with the ecological validity of product-oriented 
assessments, such as game-based assessments, could significantly improve the overall 
construct validity of creativity assessment tools (see Digital games). 
The majority of Creativity assessment tasks are process-oriented. Sometimes known as 
divergent thinking tests, most of them ask participants to generate different ideas in 
response to specific stimuli, often pictorial or verbal (Clapham, 2011[100]). Common 
response formats in these tasks include creating drawings from incomplete figures, writing 
questions for hypothetical scenarios, or listing potential uses for objects. Typically, 
divergent thinking tests evaluate several features of these responses, such as fluency (the 
ability to develop large numbers of ideas), flexibility (the ability to produce ideas in 
numerous categories), originality (the ability to produce unusual or unique ideas) and 
elaboration (the ability to adapt abstract ideas into realistic solutions). 
The Divergent Thinking Task developed by An, Song and Carr (2016[101]) and tested on a 
population of Korean students is a paradigmatic example of a divergent thinking test, 
where participants are asked to produce as many of their own creative hypotheses as 
possible to account for a real-world problem. Experts then score the divergent thinking task 
using three criteria: fluency, flexibility, and originality. This task has been controlled for 
internal consistency (but not test-retest reliability) and tested for construct and criterion 
validity. However divergent thinking scores did not correlate with self-reported measures 
of creativity, and divergent thinking scores were predicted significantly by external 
measures of creative personality. 
A seminal test of divergent thinking is the Torrance Test for Creative Thinking (TTCT) 
(Torrance, 1966[102]). The TTCT has been widely used and extensively tested in different 
populations, age groups and cultures, and has reached its current form through repeated 
revisions since its first publication in 1966 (Yoon, 2017[103]). The revisions have mainly 
concerned the scoring system, while the content and form have remained unchanged. What 
distinguished the TTCT from other creativity or divergent thinking tests was not only how 
Ellis Paul Torrance defined creativity, but also how he made the test fun, easy to use, and 
applicable to different populations and cultures (Alabbasi et al., 2022[104]). Another 
important difference from other divergent thinking tests was that Torrance added measures 
of other creative expressions to the list of creative strengths, such as humour, storytelling 
and boundary breaking.  
This expanded the scope of the TTCT beyond divergent thinking (Alabbasi et al., 2022[104]). 
The TTCT consists of two subtests, the Verbal battery and the Figural battery, which both 
have two parallel forms, A and B. The Figural battery is generally known to be less 
influenced by cultural biases or the subject's linguistic ability than the Verbal battery 
(Yoon, 2017[103]). The Verbal battery of the TTCT consists of six tasks relying heavily on 
writing (Alabbasi et al., 2022[104]). Each task of the Verbal battery presents participants 
with a picture as a stimulus for verbal exercises to which they respond in writing. The first 
three tasks, Asking, Guessing causes and Guessing consequences (collectively known as 
Ask-and-Guess), explore the link between curiosity and creativity. The fourth task, Product 
improvement, focuses on improving existing products as opposed to creating entirely new 
ones. In the fifth task, named the Unusual uses task, participants think of alternative uses 
for common objects, such as wheels. Finally, the sixth task named Just suppose challenges 
