EDU/WKP(2024)11  11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
behaviours and skills usually require more time and human resources to be produced, 
administered and scored. Also, for those assessments requiring a correct course of action, 
the optimal choice often relies on the establishment of consensus from a group of experts, 
which can result in cultural biases (Wigelsworth et al., 2010[11]). 
Direct measurement approaches can rely on different strategies. Behaviour-based 
assessments constitute one major subset, using SJTs, tasks and games to present test-takers 
with contextualised social and emotional situations in increasing levels of audiovisual 
stimulation and ecological validity, to assess their SES in contexts that elicit more authentic 
behaviours. Rather than asking children whether they consider themselves empathetic, 
creative or collaborative, these assessments present them with performance tests, 
hypothetical contexts or real-life situations where they can contextually express their 
capabilities. In the most complex behavioural approach, assessing students through 
gamified simulation-based experiences allows them to enact actions, choices and 
behaviours in an immersive way that is engaging and motivating, potentially alleviating the 
burden of test anxiety. However, assessing children with stimuli and contexts that are very 
specific, without presenting a variety of situations,  might limit our ability to extrapolate 
date and generalise conclusions regarding children’s behaviours and SES (De Klerk, 
Veldkamp and Eggen, 2015[15]; Kyllonen and Kell, 2018[16]). 
Other direct measurement approaches involve collecting biophysiological measures, which 
can derive from a variety of sources, such as heart activity, saliva or blood, eye movements 
and attention, skin conductance as well as multiple manifestations of brain activity, ranging 
from simple to cutting-edge technology. Biophysiological measurements reflect 
spontaneous actions which are less prone to conscious alterations than self-reports, and 
have evolved to show somewhat valid correlations with some psychological measurements 
(Abrahams et al., 2019[7]). However, biodata is also subject to many variables, so there are 
still issues regarding how direct and linear extrapolations about psychological states and 
SES can be made. Similarly, rather than asking people how they feel and think, it becomes 
possible to analyse their speech, facial expressions, and gestures with unprecedent 
sophistication, detecting subtle differences which are informative of their internal states 
(Beyan et al., 2021[17]) (Westera et al., 2019[18]). Various AI applications are now capable 
of collecting subtle and humanely undecipherable information on individuals, enriching 
our portfolio of direct data for analysis, surpassing many biases of self-reports. With all the 
foreseeable progress, there are, of course, many other biases and ethical concerns that arise 
and that are the centre of societies’ current debates and decisions (Tuomi, 2022[19]). 
These direct measurement approaches for SES illustrate that the scientific progress aligned 
with recent technological advances has resulted in the development of more sophisticated 
and ecologically valid tools to capture more authentic behaviours. These approaches and 
tools counter many of the biases self-reports carry, albeit bringing new issues and 
challenges that will require rigorous efforts to be overcome (Abrahams et al., 2019[7]). 
Nevertheless, there are new paradigms for assessment which diversify the current portfolio 
and future improvements and technologies will certainly help consolidate their potential. 
Direct measurements offer, thus, complementary benefits to those of self-reports, allowing 
these two broad assessment approaches to collectively shed light on the same reality, 
human behaviour. 
2.2. Situational judgement tests 
Self-reports ask participants to report on their feelings and intentions, whereas behavioural 
assessments directly look into people’s behaviours, actions and choices and, from those, 
infer the appropriate SES. SJTs can be considered a self-report as they explicitly ask 
participants to report on feelings, intentions and decisions, rather than having their practical 
