EDU/WKP(2024)11  37 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Figure 4.3. Image representing an Extrinsic Affective Simon Task 
 
Note: Participants are (A) faster to respond to implicitly positive-coloured words when the answer button is 
associated to the positive words in the white condition, and (B) faster to respond to implicitly positive-coloured 
words when the answer button is associated to the negative words in the white condition. 
Curiosity 
Only one task-based assessment was found to assess the skill of Curiosity. Defined simply 
as “the desire to know” (Schutte and Malouff, 2020[95]), this ability is better tested in game 
contexts, where the free decision of the players are informative of their preferences and of 
their unsolicited and genuine tendency to look for knowledge. 
In a study aimed to explore how Curiosity can be initiated, supported, and assessed in a 
digital environment, Sher, Levi-Keren and Gordon (2019[96]) designed a novel app destined 
to university applicants. The Faculty Game allows users to freely explore and learn about 
various topics without predefined tasks, capturing their exploration patterns and the depth 
and breadth of their interests. Through detailed behavioural measures extracted from the 
app's usage data – such as the start time of interaction, the number of facts explored, and 
the users' exploration patterns – the study proposed a way to quantify curiosity. These 
measures provided insights into the participants' specific and diverse interests, as well as 
their exploratory behaviour, offering a comprehensive view of Curiosity. Additionally, the 
study looked into how providing users with the autonomy to cease their exploration at will 
affected their behaviour and learning. This setup aimed to mirror natural curiosity-driven 
learning environments closely. 
Creativity 
In past OECD work, Creativity as the ability to generate novel ways to do or think about 
things through tinkering, learning from failure, insight, and vision (Chernyshenko, 
Kankaraš and Drasgow, 2018[40]). In the direct assessment literature, Creativity is defined 
as the ability to produce tangible objects and ideas that are (1) novel, original, unexpected 
and (2) appropriate, useful and adaptive concerning task constraints (Perry and Karpova, 
2017[97]). These two components of Creativity, novelty and usefulness, should be taken 
into consideration for its assessment (Shaw, 2022[98]). 
The direct assessments of Creativity primarily revolve around two main approaches: 
process-oriented assessments and product-oriented assessments (Rafner et al., 2023[99]). 
Process-oriented assessments typically involve standardised tests that focus on creative 
processes like idea generation and refinement. This approach is valued for its scalability, 
allowing for widespread application across various contexts. However, they often face 
criticism for their lack of real-world applicability and motivational elements. On the other 
