58  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
5.2. Virtual reality and augmented reality  
The technologies sustaining Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) have 
greatly expanded over the last decade and the increasingly affordable costs associated with 
these tools have paved way for higher accessibility and more diverse applications, both for 
entertaining and learning purposes. In educational contexts, for instance, the immersive and 
interactive worlds these technologies offer to users allow them to explore virtual field trips 
or visually manipulate 3D scientific concepts like human cells or the solar system. These 
interactive learning experiences, otherwise unattainable in the real world or limited to two-
dimensional representations on paper or screen, leverage the engagement and motivation 
in students (AlGerafi et al., 2023[175]; Papanastasiou et al., 2019[176]). 
VR is a technology which immerses people in a completely virtual and digital 3D 
environment, whereas AR fuses digital information with the physical environment 
individuals see, allowing for a fluid interaction between real and digital elements, hence 
augmenting the real-world experience. In education contexts, AR allows students to 
interact with observable objects in their classroom which are blended with digital 
annotations or animations, amplifying real-world visualisation with contextual 
information. VR, on the other hand, fully immerses people in environments in which 
variables are fully controlled to display a very precise experience. Together, these two 
technologies contribute to diversify learning opportunities for students, in more engaging, 
immersive and creative ways (AlGerafi et al., 2023[175]; Papanastasiou et al., 2019[176]). 
The literature review has shown the educational research on VR and AR is much more 
prolific regarding the use of these technologies for learning rather than for assessment. 
However, these two dimensions are not mutually exclusive, as the learning interventions 
implemented in VR often also comprise an assessment component, often formative 
assessment, suggesting the possibility of a relatively easy adaption. Therefore, the use of 
VR and AR in learning interventions will be briefly discussed here. A recent metanalysis 
has demonstrated the use of VR in education results in better learning outcomes for both 
knowledge and skill development, when compared with the impact of non-immersive 
digital technologies or even with typical school lectures. Importantly, the authors found 
this technology particularly benefits primary and lower secondary students, when 
compared to post-secondary school learners (Wu, Yu and Gu, 2020[177]). Other work has 
corroborated the advantage of immersive VR for learning outcomes, especially for highly 
complex scientific content and problems demanding more visual-spatial cognitive demands 
(Hamilton et al., 2021[178]). Similarly, a large body of research has validated that the 
inclusion of AR in pedagogical practices, across different countries and school levels, also 
leads to improved learning outcomes and high levels of student engagement 
(Lampropoulos et al., 2022[179]). On the other hand, a metanalysis looking in particular at 
the use of VR for social skills development found that, even though VR shows 
effectiveness, it is not necessarily better than non-immersive digital technologies (Howard 
and Gutworth, 2020[180]). Such finding, however, might only reflect that existing games and 
programmes do not yet fully explore the potential of VR. Since this technology is under 
constant development, both from graphical and interactive perspectives, future virtual 
training programs will perhaps prove more effective in developing social skills. 
One of the main advantages of the immersiveness of VR is precisely to foster a greater 
“sense of presence”, as it is often described, which better mimics real-world experiences 
(Wilkinson, Brantley and Feng, 2021[181]). For example, research has shown immersive 
environments can more effectively stimulate cognitive function, resulting in improved 
memory performance when performing tasks in VR rather using classical digital tools 
(Ventura et al., 2019[182]). In the context of this work, it is particularly useful to understand 
