16  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
these tools in the context of the development of an international large-scale assessment of 
SES, they can also be used to better understand the current state of the assessment field for 
the techniques and for the skills reviewed. 
These criteria are intended to help illustrate the strengths and limitations of the assessment 
tools reviewed. They are not intended to be a formal comparison of tools or an endorsement 
of any tool. The ratings for the criteria are qualitative in nature, not quantitative. They were 
created relatively to the initial purpose of this review (that is, to select the most promising 
tools for the creation of a large-scale international direct assessment of SES). The criteria 
and the ratings are defined in more detail hereunder, along with the full list of descriptors, 
available in the online table (Behavioural Assessment Tools for SES). The online table 
allows for the filtering and ranking of the tools based on different characteristics reflecting 
different priorities, be it age coverage, quality of validation process or type of skills 
covered, for example. We encourage readers to prioritise which criteria are most important 
for use in their particular context. 
3.2.1. Descriptors 
On top of the criteria used to compare the tools, available descriptors in the online table 
include:  
• 
Name of the tool; 
• 
Brief description of the tool and variables used; 
• 
Source(s); 
• 
Type of assessment tool (task, task paradigm, game, mixed battery); 
• 
OECD skill equivalent (Based on the definition of the skill(s) given in the 
publication, each tool is associated with one or several OECD skill equivalents 
from the list of skills reviewed - see Annex A: Search terms for SES). 
• 
Original skill(s) and respective definition(s); 
• 
Target age range information (as the content of the measure must be 
developmentally appropriate, it is important that emotional/social stimulus material 
is properly validated on the target population (Mehlsen et al., 2019[33]). Therefore, 
the target age group for each tool is indicated as: Children (6-12); Adolescents (12-
18); Adults (>18). Finer age information is provided when available); 
• 
Countries and languages (in which tools have been tested). 
3.2.2. Ecological validity 
Ecological validity is understood as a measure of the representativeness of the instrument; 
in other words, the correspondence between the form and context of the assessment and the 
situations in natural contexts (Burguess et al., 2006[34]). It is particularly important in the 
context of this review of very heterogenous tools, for which there are strong differences in 
the presentation of content. The ecological validity of each tool is rated according to several 
sub-criteria: 
• 
Openness of action: Restricted freedom of exploration, with pre-determined order 
of activities / Possible exploration of different activities (0/1) 
• 
Type of response: Fixed choice (e.g., based on multiple choices, or pressing button 
quickly) / Open-ended (includes writing full answers) OR free choice (e.g., choose 
whether to move an avatar, choose to switch between tasks) (0/1) 
