56  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
curious showed different eye movement patterns when engaging with reading materials, 
namely by displaying different gaze dynamics when anticipating new knowledge (Baranes, 
Oudeyer and Gottlieb, 2015[158]). Similar findings were observed for the relationship 
between Creativity and eye movements, by having one hundred adult participants solving 
a figural creativity test while wearing eye tracking devices. The researchers found that the 
more fixations recorded on particular areas of interest, and the longer those fixations, the 
higher the participants’ scores on the creativity test were. Thus, simple information on eye 
movements and fixations was able to predict the scores obtained by participants in a 
creative task (Jankowska et al., 2018[159]). 
Eye tracking technologies have been incorporated into game-based assessments to provide 
additional information on players’ internal states and behaviours, including specific skills. 
An example is Crystal Island, a game initially designed to teach middle school students 
about varied science content, as well as scientific reasoning and problem-solving abilities 
in an engaging way (Lester et al., 2014[160]). Since its initial development, research efforts 
have multiplied the number of variations around the game and of experiments to understand 
the learning process underlying the exploration of this world, with studies mostly in young 
adult populations. In one of these variations, researchers created a complex narrative 
regarding a mysterious disease which has spread throughout this fictional island (Taub 
et al., 2017[161]). In this exploratory 3D game, the player is tasked to collect clues in order 
to uncover the source of the disease, by exploring the island, visiting different buildings, 
talking to people and interacting with objects. Critically, these objects include papers and 
posters, sometimes with complex texts, and food items which can be tested in the 
laboratory, all to understand the microbiological source of the disease. After collecting the 
information they had to fill out matrices with questions to reach a conclusion. To assess the 
Metacognition skill of the players, the game tracked the players’ choices regarding the 
number and the specific virtual books they choose to interact and read before giving their 
answers. Importantly, they complement this data by incorporating eye tracking 
mechanisms to collect data on specific fixation points and fixation durations associated 
with the reading material necessary to solve the mystery. This way, the exact information 
players look for when reading the books and papers and portions they choose to reflect on 
could be verified.  
Researchers found that participants who have higher fixation periods both when reading 
the books for information and when filling out the matrices with questions show poorer 
performance. In turn, lower proportions of fixations and going back to each book more 
frequently was associated with better performance, when having to conclude about the 
origins of the disease. The researchers’ interpretation of these results was that participants 
who decided to spend less time reading the entire book, and instead strategically opted to 
scoop for the relevant information needed to complete the matrices, show better 
metacognitive abilities. So, going back and forth between the questions and the source of 
information needed to answer them, quickly identifying the more relevant pieces of text, 
reflects a prioritising of quality over quantity, and is framed as a more efficient 
metacognitive ability. The advantage of this game in combining the assessment of 
metacognition skills in a challenging and immersive learning context has led to various 
other papers exploring additional dimensions of metacognition and agency, by employing 
both eye tracking and facial expression analysis (Dever and Azevedo, 2019[162]; Dever 
et al., 2020[163]; Emerson et al., 2020[164]) 
5.1.3. Cortisol 
Cortisol is a hormone physiologically associated with stress and stress responses, usually 
rising in reaction to various psychological and physical stressors. It can thus be used a 
