EDU/WKP(2024)11  9 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
data. With a wider portfolio of validated direct assessments, it will be possible to identify 
the most promising ones and, from those, develop a large-scale assessment of SES. Such a 
tool will be instrumental to assess SEL interventions and compare their efficacy across 
different cultural contexts, or to understand the most important skills to target in various 
countries. 
The purpose of this paper is to identify and review the existing innovative assessment tools 
and technological approaches focused on direct measurements of SES. Such assessments 
and approaches tap on the manifestation of these skills on behaviour, including actions, 
choices and performances, rather than relying on subjective judgements from students 
themselves, teachers, parents or peers (Abrahams et al., 2019[7]). Thus, direct measurement 
tools include behavioural assessments, which comprise tasks and digital games. 
Additionally, technological approaches that can transversally improve the quality and 
scope of different assessments tools are also discussed. These include virtual reality (VR) 
and augmented reality (AR) technologies, biophysiological measures, digital footprints and 
more advanced artificial intelligent (AI) applications. 
Although this paper covers all these instruments and techniques, the limitations and 
practical constraints of some of them led us to focus our analysis on behavioural 
assessments, which are presently more promising. We conducted a comprehensive review, 
mapping almost 60 different behavioural assessments, between tasks and digital games, for 
which we present descriptive information as well as a comparative analysis based on 
several validity criteria. Collectively, these innovative assessment tools tend to offer higher 
levels of immersiveness and engagement, in a variety of interface and gameplay designs 
(Emihovich, Arrington and Xu, 2019[8]; Fulya Eyupoglu and Nietfeld, 2019[9]). The 
contextualised social and emotional stimuli these tools allow results in a manifestation of 
more spontaneous and authentic behaviours in children, beyond what classical reports can 
offer (Ren, 2019[10]). Such benefits result in increased ecological validity and objectivity of 
SES assessment and expands the portfolio of current assessment approaches. 
The paper is structured in the following way. Section 2 discusses the contrast between the 
benefits and disadvantages of self-reports and direct measurements for assessing SES and 
discusses Situational Judgement Tests (SJTs) as a step towards more direct measurement 
approaches. Section 3 introduces the methodology used to conduct the thorough mapping 
of the existent behavioural assessment tools and the technological approaches for direct 
assessment, including the presentation of various criteria used to analyse the different tools. 
Then, Section 4 presents an ample coverage of innovative behavioural assessment tools, 
mapping the existent tasks and digital games used to assess SES. Section 5, on the other 
hand, focuses on technological approaches that can transversally apply to different tasks 
and games to improve assessment, including biophysiological measures, VR and AR, AI 
applications, as well as digital footprints and behavioural data from videogames. Finally, 
Section 6 summarises and discusses the reviewed assessment tools and transversal 
technological approaches, promoting a dialogue between different types of tools, as to 
identify the strengths and challenges associated with each of them. In particular, the 
contrasts between game-based and task-based behavioural assessments are extensively 
discussed. 
2. Expanding beyond indirect assessment 
2.1. Comparison between Self-reports and Direct measurements 
Self-reported questionnaires offer a wide range of available measurements regarding the 
breath and specificity of the skills assessed, which results from the easy adaptability of the 
