EDU/WKP(2024)11  25 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
(see for example Figure 4.2). As in the original tasks, in these emotionally adapted tasks, 
Inhibitory motor control is gauged by measuring the reaction time difference in responding 
to relevant versus irrelevant stimuli (Bland et al., 2016[42]). While these paradigms are 
relatively simple, and have been thoroughly tested, validated and used to assess very 
diverse populations, it is debatable whether these tests actually measure SES, or rather more 
basic, fundamental cognitive processes that may be constituents/components of the SES 
but not the full SES themselves. 
Another aspect of Self-control relates to the ability to delay gratification, which is measured 
in neuropsychology by another set of Inhibitory control paradigms, the Delay of 
Gratification Tasks. In these tasks, participants have to choose between small but short-
term rewards or larger rewards to be received later. 
Reflecting these two aspects of Self-control, the EMOTICOM battery, made of 16 
neuropsychological tasks destined to assess various facets of four core domains of affective 
cognition (Emotion processing, Motivation and reward, Impulsivity, and Social cognition) 
(Bland et al., 2016[42]), distinguishes between two types of Impulsivity measures 
(Impulsivity being very similar to Self-control as defined by the OECD). It proposes to 
measure Waiting Impulsivity, described as a measure of action inhibition or motor 
inhibitory control, and Delay and Probability Discounting, a measure of preference for 
immediate gratification or ability to delay gratification. Waiting Impulsivity is measured 
through the Four-Choice Serial Reaction Time Task. This task assesses visual attention, 
and the ability to respond to unpredictable targets while inhibiting automatic motor 
response. Participants have to indicate as fast as possible, from four choices, the box in 
which a target symbol has briefly appeared but withhold their answer for other non-target 
symbols. Delay and Probability Discounting is measured through a Discounting task. In 
such task, participants choose between smaller immediate rewards and larger delayed ones, 
such as deciding between $5 now or $10 in a week. These choices help measure the 
discount rate, which reflects how much a person devalues future rewards based on the wait 
time. High discount rates show a preference for immediate gratification, suggesting 
impulsivity, while lower rates indicate patience and a tendency towards future-oriented 
decisions. Finally, the EMOTICOM battery also comprises an emotional version of the 
Go/No-Go Task. While the Go/No-Go Task is traditionally a seminal task for assessing 
Inhibitory control, it is used to assess Emotion recognition in the EMOTICOM battery. The 
Face Affective Go/No-Go Task involves presenting participants with a series of faces 
displaying different emotions (e.g., happy, sad, angry) and instructing them to respond 
(typically by pressing a button) only to faces showing a specific target emotion (the "Go" 
condition) while refraining from responding to faces showing non-target emotions (the 
"No-Go" condition). Importantly, although the EMOTICOM battery has the advantage of 
exploring different facets of skills using different tasks, it currently lacks robust validation 
of internal consistency and construct and criterion validity. It has been however tested with 
a sample of participants with ethnic characteristics representative of the UK demographics. 
Another neuropsychological test adapted into an emotional variant is the Emotional Stroop 
task (Aïte et al., 2018[43]; Bouhours et al., 2021[44]). This test exists in various adaptations 
and explores how emotional content affects a person's reaction time. In the simplest, colour-
naming version of the task, participants are shown words in different colours and asked to 
name the writing colour, rather than reading the word itself (see Figure 4.2). Some of these 
words are emotionally charged (e.g., "anger", "joy"), while others are neutral. Participants 
take longer to name the colour of the ink for words with emotional content compared to 
neutral words. This delay is thought to occur because the emotional significance of the 
word captures the participant's attention, interfering with the task of colour naming. Other 
versions of this paradigm include for example pictures of expressive faces. The Emotional 
Stroop Task is used to study attentional biases towards emotional information, which can 
