EDU/WKP(2024)11  43 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Both these mixed batteries have been validated in thousands of children, contemplating 
gender and ethnicity comparisons, with high reliability, including internal consistency and 
test-retest metrics, for all different tests used. Moreover, construct validity has been found 
for both versions and, in particular, EE SELweb results has also been positively tested for 
criterion validity by correlating with academic outcomes (McKown, 2019[113]; McKown 
et al., 2023[115]; McKown, Russo-Ponsaran and Karls, 2023[114]). 
The MSCEIT [Mayer, Salovey, & Caruso, 2002] and the MSCEIT-YV (Rivers et al., 
2012[116]) are batteries developed to assess Emotional Intelligence (EI) in adults, and in 
children and adolescents, respectively. The conceptualisation of EI is a highly debated topic 
in the scientific literature and the exact scope of abilities it captures is not consensual 
(Anglim et al., 2020[117]; Vaida and Opre, 2014[118]). The authors of this seminal battery 
have defined it as “the ability to monitor one's own and others' feelings and emotions, to 
discriminate among them and to use this information to guide one's thinking and actions” 
(Salovey and Mayer, 1990[119]). According to this definition, EI can be framed as complex 
psychological construct which encompasses multiple dimensions and skills that can be 
dispatched across the OECD framework of SES. In that sense, it is possible to decompose 
EI into Metacognition, Emotion recognition, Perspective-taking, Emotional control, and 
Social problem-solving skills.  
The overall scale of EI is divided in four branches of abilities grouped in two EI areas 
(Experiential EI includes Perceiving emotions and Facilitating thought; Strategic EI 
includes Understanding emotions and Managing emotions). Each branch score, in turn, is 
made up of two individual tasks. MSCEIT-YV is slightly different from the adult version. 
One of its tasks involves identifying emotions in photographed faces of youth, covering 
Emotion recognition abilities. A different task complexifies what is requested from 
participants, by presenting definitions of emotions or describing social situations. Then, 
through a multiple-choice method, test-takers are asked to interpret the definitions, the 
social context, or the causes of emotional states in others, in order to identify the correct 
emotion term that fits the situation, which aligns both with Metacognition and 
Perspective-taking. Another task asks test-takers to imagine which physical sensations 
they associate with certain emotions, for example by describing a scenario and then asking 
how much the corresponding feeling of anger corresponds with each of these words: “hot, 
red, relaxed, or heavy”. Such a task requires the ability to understand own’s thoughts and 
emotions and create connections with subjective appreciation of other concepts, requiring 
Metacognition skills. Lastly, test-takers are asked to rank the effectiveness of alternative 
actions to address social and emotional situations involving other people, which taps into 
Social problem-solving. 
The MSCEIT batteries remain the flagship test of EI in adults. Even if most research has 
focused on the adult version of MSCEIT, literature also supports that the MSCEIT-YV is 
both objectively scoreable and reliably measurable. Additionally, EI scores show 
convergent validity with similar measures  and divergent validity with assessments 
measuring  similar but distinct constructs (Peters, Kranzler and Rossen, 2009[120]; Rivers 
et al., 2012[116]). However, convergence between MSCEIT scores and other measurements 
of EI is still affected by the differences in the conceptualisation of EI and the subsequent 
mismatch between scales of different instruments (Windingstad et al., 2011[121]). Moreover, 
criterion validity has also been confirmed by correlations of between EI scores with 
positive outcomes, such as academic achievement, prosocial behaviour and well-
being/health (Rivers et al., 2012[116]). 
