18  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
compared with at least one other established measurement for the same construct / 
The assessment tool has been compared with at least one other established 
measurement for the same construct (but non-significant correlations are flagged) 
(0/1). 
As a limitation, it should be noted that the review of construct validity did not 
include divergent/discriminant validity. 
• 
Criterion validity – whether the score from the instrument predicts current 
(concurrent validity) or future (predictive validity) real-life performance or other 
external outcomes of interest (e.g., academic success, reported prosocial/aggressive 
behaviours, subjective well-being three years later): Behavioural results from the 
assessment tool have not been correlated with external outcomes / Behavioural 
results from the assessment tool correlate with external outcomes (0/1) 
• 
Fairness – whether an instrument is not biased against specific socioeconomic or 
cultural or ethnical subgroups of individuals. Information that could support this 
component of validity includes statistical tests showing that scores from the 
measure function similarly across all subgroups (Cox, Foster and Bamat, 2019[35]): 
The assessment tool has not been tested for differences between diverse 
socioeconomic or cultural or ethnical subgroups / The assessment tool has been 
tested for differences between diverse socioeconomic or cultural or ethnical 
subgroups, at a country or international level (0/1). 
As a limitation, it should be noted that Fairness did not include a review of 
measurement invariance analyses, nor gender differences. 
3.2.4. Feasibility, costs, and licence 
This criterion encompasses information on practical aspects of the tool, related to: 
• 
Duration – mean time to perform the assessment: More than 30 minutes per skill / 
Less than 30 minutes per skill (0/1) 
• 
Administration: Staff is required to administer the assessment / Staff is not required 
to administer the assessment (0/1) 
• 
Grading: Grading of participants’ responses is not automatic and requires an 
evaluator / Automatic grading of responses (0/1) 
Information on availability is reported when available (including equipment needed, such 
as headset for VR, or license). Since the vast majority of the tools included are digital, the 
review assumes minimal requirements: hardware devices; internet connection. 
4. Behaviour-based assessment tools 
As an alternative to asking a student or teacher to report on behaviour, it is possible to 
observe behaviour through various tasks and games, where students make choices and 
actions from which we can infer aspects of their behaviour and, by extension, their SES. A 
behavioural task is essentially a situation that has been designed to elicit meaningful 
differences in behaviour of a certain kind. Observing students in the identical contrived 
situation eliminates the possible confound of variation in the base rates of certain types of 
situations (Galla and Duckworth, 2015[37]). 
Behaviour-based assessments include tasks as well as digital games, with different levels 
of complexity, richness of audiovisual stimuli, immersiveness, interactivity, and, 
