46  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
while the American students outperformed their Japanese counterparts in both Empathy 
and Sociability skills. This difference in social skills’ performance observed through ZooU, 
reflected documented cultural differences between these countries, further validating this 
tool as an assessment able to capture cultural variations reinforcing its utility as a 
measurement tool for comparability. Further validation came from a more recent study 
associating the performance in SES with social competence outcomes, in terms of 
children’s behaviours and academic performance in school environments (DeRosier and 
Thomas, 2018[130]). Researchers show that children with more developed SES, as measured 
by ZooU, displayed more prosocial behaviours and academic adjustment, “above and 
beyond demographic influences”, when compared to colleagues who performed poorly in 
the game. This detailed description, covering both the game mechanisms and some validity 
metrics, serves as an example of how a game can be designed to specifically target 
individual skills, correlating the data with external psychometric assessments which attest 
for the quality of the game-based assessment being employed. 
4.3.2. Physics Playground – Persistence / Creativity / Co-operation 
Through very simple design and mechanisms, games like Physics Playground can benefit 
from a great deal of flexibility in the way they assess SES. Initially oriented towards testing 
Persistence (Ventura and Shute, 2013[131]), based on a principle of overcoming 
increasingly difficult tasks, this game has more recently been used to test entirely different 
skills, such as Creativity (Shute and Rahimi, 2021[132]) and Co-operation (Sun et al., 
2022[133]). Physics Playground was built around the premise of teaching the basic principles 
of physics by having players draw different mechanisms, like ramps, levers and pendulums, 
to move certain objects to certain places, in order to complete puzzles and proceed to the 
next level (Shute, Ventura and Kim, 2013[134]). As these challenges are increasingly 
difficult, children must be persistent in their attempts, creating and perfecting different 
devices while relying on gravity and the laws of physics to do the rest of the work. 
Researchers have taken advantage of this design to measure Persistence, by collecting the 
time spent on each unsolved and solved problem by middle school students aged 13 to 15. 
The performance data extracted from the game correlated well with the results from a 
different task to measure Persistence, even after controlling for videogame experience and 
pretest physics knowledge, although it did not meet correlations with self-reported levels 
of persistence. This discrepancy was interpreted as self-reports on Persistence being 
inadequate measurements, since students might perceive their skill in a manner which does 
not necessarily correspond to their real behaviour (Ventura and Shute, 2013[131]). 
As mentioned, Physics Playground can also be used to measure Creativity skills, when 
different sets of data are collected (Shute and Rahimi, 2021[132]). For example, researchers 
can assess how original a mechanical device to solve a puzzle is, by measuring how it 
differs from the other players’ solutions, and also how flexible it is, measured by the design 
of multiple and effective physics mechanisms to solve the puzzle, rather than drawing 
simplistic ones. In order to prompt maximal Creativity, players are, in fact, incentivised to 
create the “most awesome” solution. The researchers also assessed players on their ability 
to design their own creative levels from scratch (Figure 4.5). Similarly to what was 
observed with the Persistence skill, Creativity measurements, as defined by performance 
in the game, correlated well with these students’ performance in other creative tasks but 
not with their self-reports.  
