EDU/WKP(2024)11  15 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Given the focus on innovative assessments underlying this paper, a filter was applied to 
locate articles published in 2015 or afterwards. Of note, tools developed before 2015 were 
included and reviewed only when more recent scientific publications used, and sometimes 
even adapted, those same tools. The 2015 cutoff is a way to ensure that the tools included 
in this review have still been used in relatively recent years and, therefore, still relevant. 
Titles and abstracts were screened in order to assure that the papers introduced and tested 
a new behavioural assessment tool, rather than relying solely on indirect questionnaire-
based reports. Articles that included assessment tools specifically designed for clinical 
purposes, targeting neurodivergent populations or populations that suffer from 
neuropsychiatric conditions, such as autism, depression or attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder, were excluded, unless the tool was also validated on a neurotypical control 
population. Articles that included assessment tools only applicable to preschoolers (< 6 
years old) were excluded. Also, we focused primarily on original research papers, although 
review articles that included references to original assessment tools were also initially kept 
for further extraction. Finally, given that the purpose of this work was to map new 
assessment tools in the literature, we excluded task- or game-based behavioural 
assessments already developed and validated by the OECD. They include the Xandar Task, 
on Collaborative problem solving, used in PISA1 2015 (OECD, 2017[31]), or the Creative 
Thinking Assessment, applied in PISA 2022 (OECD, 2022[32]). 
The final selection of skills and keywords was driven by the need to cover the literature on 
direct assessment tools of SES as thoroughly as possible. The objective is to provide a 
broad mapping of the state of the art on a large number of skills. This work does not aim to 
impose a taxonomy of SES. Debates regarding the classification of certain constructs, such 
as whether they should be classified as skills or traits, or whether they fall under the 
category of SES, are briefly mentioned in the relevant sections. However, a detailed 
analysis of these debates is beyond the scope of this work. To ensure that the constructs 
reviewed were consistent with the broad OECD definition of SES (see Glossary), we 
defined each skill by incorporating contributions from the OECD framework 
(Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]), along with other definitions from the 
literature. Additionally, we included the operational definitions of each skill used by the 
developers of the assessment tools. For this reason, we established an equivalence between 
the construct evaluated by the tool and our terminology, based on the content of their 
respective definitions. For example, if the purpose of a tool is to assess “Impulsivity 
Control”, we code that skill as “Self-control”, after verifying the definition provided in the 
publication and the construct being assessed by the tool effectively align the OECD 
framework. 
We identified and reviewed 57 behavioural assessment tools and paradigms, including, 34 
task-based assessments and 20 game-based assessments. We also identified and included 
information from several articles that more extensively tested existing assessment tools, 
developed either by the same research group or other groups. These articles expanded the 
applicability of the respective tools, by modifying or modernising their design or by further 
validating them with different populations. The full list of assessment tools reviewed can 
be consulted in Annex B: Full list of identified behavioural assessment tools, where DOIs 
links for the respective articles are provided.  
3.2. Criteria for review 
The tools were described and reviewed according to a set of criteria. While these criteria 
and their associated ratings were originally defined to allow an informed comparison of 
 
1 OECD’s PISA: Programme for International Student Assessment 
