30  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Emotional control 
Emotional control is defined in the OECD framework as the ability to implement effective 
strategies to regulate temper, anger and irritation, in the face of frustrations (Chernyshenko, 
Kankaraš and Drasgow, 2018[40]; Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). Interestingly, 
while Emotional control could also be understood as the ability to upregulate positive 
emotions (focusing on happy memories when feeling a bit depressed, for example), or 
downregulate positive emotions in inappropriate social contexts (do not overtly show pride 
for a successful school test in front of a friend who failed, for example), most task-based 
assessments focus on downregulation of negative emotions. Another important element to 
take into consideration when assessing Emotional control is emotional intensity, which is 
a measure of a person's emotional response force. Studies show that lower emotional 
intensities often lead to adaptive regulation strategies, aiding in emotion processing, 
whereas higher intensities can result in maladaptive strategies, causing disengagement from 
emotions (Watanabe, Motomura and Saeki, 2022[61]). 
The Beach Balls Task measures frustration tolerance (Jiménez-Soto et al., 2022[62]) .Aimed 
at children aged 6-10, the task measures Frustration tolerance by requiring participants to 
select the smallest of four beach balls on screen within five seconds. The test comprises 
three sets, with Sets 1 and 3 identical to gauge baseline performance. Set 2, designed to 
induce frustration, features minimal size differences between balls, thus challenging the 
children's ability to perform under increased difficulty. Frustration tolerance is measured 
as the performance difference between Set 3 (after the “frustrating” phase) and Set 1. A 
limited drop in performance is considered a hallmark of higher Frustration tolerance. In the 
publication, Frustration is defined as the subjective emotion of dislike associated with high 
levels of effort and low levels of success in a task, and while Frustration tolerance is 
described as a “process dependent on emotional regulation” (Jiménez-Soto et al., 2022[62]), 
the task is very similar to Persistence tasks. Moreover, this task does not seem to allow for 
disentangling Emotional control of irritation from boredom. 
The Laboratory Coping And Emotion Regulation Task assesses Emotion regulation in 
children and adolescents defined as a set of conscious, controlled processes that aim to 
regulate emotions, thoughts, behaviours, and physiological responses in the face of 
stressors (Bettis et al., 2019[63]). Participants are assessed on secondary control coping 
strategies like acceptance, cognitive reappraisal, and distraction, through a task involving 
viewing images depicting parental sadness and irritability. The task, designed to reflect 
real-life family stress, included images of negative parental emotions and neutral images. 
Participants were instructed to either reappraise these images positively, distract 
themselves, or simply react, to gauge their coping and emotion regulation in response to 
familiar stressors (Bettis et al., 2019[63]). This test has been controlled for internal 
consistency (but not test-retest reliability), construct validity and criterion validity. 
Optimism 
Optimism is the ability to have positive and optimistic expectations for self and life 
(Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). Optimism can be defined as a bias characterised 
by positive assessments of self-risk relative to the average other (Hennefield and Markson, 
2022[64]). In adults, this manifests as overestimating positive outcomes and underestimating 
negative events, even when only known probabilities should guide predictions. 
Both of the identified task-based assessments of Optimism, the Future Expectations Task 
(Bamford and Lagattuta, 2020[65]) and the Story Task (Hennefield and Markson, 2022[64]), 
use a similar approach. Participants are usually presented with scenarios (written and 
sometimes illustrated) and asked to choose between optimistic and pessimistic outcomes 
