EDU/WKP(2024)11  13 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
positive outcome, which corresponds to Social problem-solving skills (MacCann and 
Roberts, 2008[24]). In this test, the 44 items also cover different workplace and personal-life 
contexts, while focusing only on three different and socially tense emotions, anger, sadness 
and fear. An example is: “Lee’s workmate fails to deliver an important piece of information 
on time, causing Lee to fall behind schedule also. What action would be the most effective 
for Lee? (a) Work harder to compensate, (b) Get angry with the workmate, (c) Explain the 
urgency of the situation to the workmate, (d) Never rely on that workmate again”, with C 
being established as the most prosocial course of action. Both these tests have been 
extensively validated in adult and adolescent populations, in various countries, with 
acceptable to good internal consistency metrics, as well as solid convergent validity with 
other psychological measurements on similar constructs, and consequential validity given 
by the correlation with higher levels of self-reported psychological well-being and life 
satisfaction, as well as higher academic achievement (MacCann and Roberts, 2008[24]; da 
Motta et al., 2021[25]; Dirzyte et al., 2021[26]; Lea et al., 2023[27]). 
Another SJT is the Social Relationship Competence–Ability Measure (SRC-AM), which 
looks at friendship contexts, presenting participants with several dilemmas, where a 
hypothetical friend has done a certain act that could be negatively impactful for the 
relationship (Persich, Krishnakumar and Robinson, 2020[28]). For each scenario, 
participants are presented with four different courses of action, which can lead to positive 
or negative outcomes, and each possible action to address the conflict must be rated 
according to its perceived effectiveness. The scenarios presented cover multiple 
interpersonal dimensions that inhabit real-life friendships, such as the ability to form and 
maintain high-quality and long-lasting friendships, to express concern and provide explicit 
social support, and to respond to tension and conflict in constructive ways. For all this, the 
social relationship competence targeted in this test covers the skills Empathy and Social 
problem-solving. As an example, one scenario is: “Randy notices that his friend seems to 
be ignoring him. Rate the effectiveness of the following ways that Randy could deal with 
the situation: a) Confront the friend, b) Ask his friend why he is being ignored, c) Ignore 
the friend in return and d) Convince himself that the friend is not ignoring him on purpose”.  
The test shows acceptable levels of internal consistency as compared to other SJTs (for 10 
scenarios requiring 40 ratings, Cronbach’s alpha coefficient = 0.7), and researchers have 
found that the performance in the test positively correlated with self-reports on commitment 
to friendships, perception of mutual care and support, and quality and intimacy level of said 
relationships (Persich, Krishnakumar and Robinson, 2020[28]). The test also correlated with 
measures of conflict-resolution inclination, with high-performance individuals being better 
at suppressing negative impulses and being more direct and open when approaching friends 
to overcome tensions (Robinson, Persich and Irvin, 2022[29]). Additional validation was 
obtained from reports by informants, close friends of those being tested, which found 
correlations between participants’ real-life behaviours and attitudes towards the respective 
friendships and their performance in the SCR-AM (Persich, Krishnakumar and Robinson, 
2020[28]). Moreover, those who did well in the test were also found to benefit from better 
psychological well-being and higher levels of positive emotion and life satisfaction, and to 
manifest widespread prosocial behaviours, beyond relationship contexts (Robinson, 
Persich and Irvin, 2022[29]). 
3. Review of direct assessment tools and innovative approaches 
This section presents the methodology used to review the literature and search for existing 
innovative direct assessment tools and technological approaches to measure SES. This 
section also details the criteria used to describe and review each tool. The comprehensive 
