EDU/WKP(2024)11  45 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
relation to external outcomes, such as mental health or academic performance, due to their 
recent development. 
4.3.1. ZooU – Emotional control / Self-control / Empathy / Co-operation / Sociability 
Although most games are developed with narratives and mechanisms focused on one 
discrete skill, some have been designed to explore complex social scenarios, so that 
multiple skills can be exercised, and thus evaluated, while playing the same game. Such is 
the case of ZooU (DeRosier, Craig and Sanchez, 2012[128]). Published in 2012, ZooU is a 
game targeted at elementary school students (3rd and 4th graders) that attempts to measure 
6 different SES, corresponding to 5 of the skills in the OECD framework (Steponavičius, 
Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]): Emotional control; Self-control; Empathy; Co-
operation; and Sociability. In this game, children embody an avatar of a student in a virtual 
school where they learn to become zookeepers and must interact with other non-playable 
characters (NPCs), such as classmates, teachers and animals. With its narratives, the game 
is designed to create analogous social situations to those lived by children in their daily 
schooldays, which include engaging in conversations with others, performing fun 
playground activities, attending to classmates in need or attentively taking care of animals. 
The choices children make, regarding their actions, the NPCs with whom they interact, 
their dialogue options, or the time they decide to spend in certain activities, are the core 
elements for the assessment of each SES. Regarding practical gameplay, children interact 
with objects and with NPCs by clicking on them, initiating pre-scripted action or dialogue 
options which can also be heard through actor-recorded audio, an element that helps the 
game become more immersive. How does ZooU measure different skills? In each 
individual scene, children encounter a specific social problem that needs to be solved. For 
example, in a scene assessing Self-control, the child needs to decide whether to feed the 
animals before going to recess or, specifically considering the dialogue options, the child 
can also decide whether to ask the teacher questions about the animals’ names or to be 
immediately allowed to go to recess. The objects present throughout the game also 
constitute key elements for assessment, as they can offer critical information, such as a 
clipboard with instructions on how to feed the animals, or they can work as distractors 
which are not task related. Even though children are given freedom to explore the virtual 
world, their scores will decrease if they diverge from their main task for a long time. Much 
like Self-control, all other five skills have their own specificities in terms of the exact type 
of data that is extracted from the game and used for assessment. As the authors explain, in 
social scenes tapping into Self-control, Co-operation and Sociability, the scores attributed 
to children depend largely on their behaviours, such as the objects and people with which 
they interact and the time spent during, and between, certain behaviours. Alternatively, for 
skills such as Empathy the key data emerges from the sequence of dialogue choices when 
interacting with classmates and teachers NPCs. 
Naturally, it is important that games collect multiple psychometric elements that help 
validate their findings. One way to achieve that is to compare the results extracted from the 
behavioural game data with indirect reports on the same skills, assessed either by the 
students themselves, or their parents, teachers and peers. In the case of ZooU, the 
researchers reported statistically significant correlations between the data obtained from 
the game and social skills measurements based on the teachers’ reports on their students 
(DeRosier, Craig and Sanchez, 2012[128]). Additional validation for this game came from a 
subsequent study by the same group, validating ZooU with a population of Japanese 
students, while respecting the necessary language adaptations for appropriate cultural 
validity (Craig, Derosier and Watanabe, 2015[129]). In this study, Japanese children 
performed better than American children in Emotional control and Co-operation skills, 
