32  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Task-based assessments of Empathy and related skills can be organised based on the 
number of aspects of Empathy they focus on. Some tests simply assess the ability to 
recognise an emotion presented in simple stimuli, such as a picture of a facial expression 
or a brief written description (Emotion recognition), some tests assess the ability to infer 
emotions of some characters based on more complex social or non-social situations 
(Cognitive empathy), and some tests also add questions on the subjective feeling of the 
participant regarding the situation described (Affective empathy). 
Many task-based assessments of Perspective-taking and Cognitive empathy (including 
Emotion recognition) exist. Here only a few are described, selected based on their diversity 
and on the quality of their validity/reliability metrics. Assessments of Emotion recognition 
include very minimalistic tests such as the Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test - Child 
Version (conceptually derived from the adult version) (Rosso and Riolfo, 2020[71]; 
Vogindroukas, Chelas and Petridis, 2014[72]), that requires children to interpret mental 
states from photographs of adult eyes, and select between one of four descriptive words. 
Some computer-administered tests use multimodal stimuli to evaluate Emotion 
recognition. This can be done either separately, such as the Emotion Recognition Index 
(Scherer and Scherer, 2011[73]) that has two subscales for facial and vocal emotion 
recognition, or together as the Geneva Emotion Recognition Test (GERT) (Schlegel, 
Grandjean and Scherer, 2014[74]) and its short version (GERT-S) (Schlegel and Scherer, 
2016[75]), which assess the recognition of a range of emotions from short video clips with 
sound (in which facial, vocal, and bodily cues are presented simultaneously). In 
consequence, the GERT has arguably better content validity than existing tests that largely 
focus on static facial expressions and basic emotions. 
By increasing the complexity of the stimuli presented (particularly by introducing 
contextual and/or social elements), other assessments are better equipped to test 
Perspective-taking/Cognitive empathy abilities. Some tests evaluate how individuals 
interpret and analyse social scenarios presented in text. The Assessment of Social 
Perspective-taking Performance (Kim et al., 2018[76]) measures both simple (articulating 
how actors think, feel, or are inclined to behave) and complex (contextualising the position 
actors take, with consideration of their roles, circumstances, experiences, and motivations) 
Perspective-taking abilities. Participants give written responses to open-ended questions 
based on hypothetical school-related dilemmas (such as discovering a friend having 
cheated on an exam). The Combined Stories Test (Achim et al., 2012[77]) evaluates a wide 
range of mental states such as beliefs, intentions, and emotions. Participants analyse 
interactions between characters, focusing particularly on second-order ToM, which 
involves understanding a character's mental state about another's mental state (e.g., a 
character's intention or false belief about another character's action or belief), as opposed 
to first-order ToM that deals with perceiving mental states about physical world conditions. 
Similarly, the Faux Pas Recognition Test focuses on more advance ToM capabilities, by 
testing whether children and adolescents are able to identify socially inappropriate 
comments from one character about another, in written vignettes (Baron-Cohen et al., 
1999[78]; Hayward and Homer, 2017[79]). Test-takers are expected to understand both states 
of mind, that the person committing the faux pas does not have malicious intent, yet says 
something which makes the other person feel confused or uncomfortable. While the 
Emotional Literacy Test with Hypothetical Scenarios (Watanabe, Motomura and Saeki, 
2022[61]) currently lacks extended validation for reliability and validity, this test uses open-
ended questions to assess the ability not only to identify and explain the rationale for 
characters' emotions, but also to assign intensity to these emotions. 
Finally, some assessments use audiovideo film stimuli instead of written or illustrated 
narrative vignettes. For example, the Social Attribution Task - Multiple Choice (SAT-MC) 
(Johannesen et al., 2013[80]), assesses implicit social attribution using an animation of 
