24  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Figure 4.1. The OECD framework and supplementary skills reviewed 
 
4.1.1. Task performance 
Self-control  
Self-control, defined as the ability “to avoid distractions and sudden impulses and focus 
attention on the current task in order to achieve personal goal” (Chernyshenko, Kankaraš 
and Drasgow, 2018[40]; Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]), is closely linked to 
Attention control and Inhibitory control, representing the cognitive aspects of Self-
regulation (http://exploresel.gse.harvard.edu/compare-terms/, accessed 10 January 2024). 
In cognitive psychology and neuropsychology, Inhibitory control is an executive function 
described as the ability to control our behaviour, emotions, and cognitions in order to adapt 
to our natural and social environment (Musek, 2017[41]). However, the relationship between 
Self-control, Self-regulation, Inhibitory control, and other executive functions is not 
uniformly defined, with some disagreement in the literature (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright 
and Linzarini, 2023[2]). Inhibitory control encompasses a broader range of cognitive 
processes, not limited to SES. To distinguish SES from foundational cognitive processes 
(see the OECD definition of SES in see Glossary), tasks reviewed for evaluating Self-
control include emotional or social aspects, ensuring they assess more than just cognitive 
abilities. 
Most of the "emotional" tasks for Self-control identified in this review are modified 
versions of traditional neuropsychological tests that evaluate Inhibitory control (Bland 
et al., 2016[42]). Standard neuropsychological tests measuring Inhibitory control through 
motor or response inhibition include the Stroop Task, Go/No-Go Task, Simon Task, 
Flanker Task, Antisaccade Tasks and Stop-Signal Tasks. These tasks focus on the 
individual's ability to override natural responses for goal-oriented behaviours. In these 
foundational paradigms, Inhibitory control is gauged by comparing the response time or 
quality of response to relevant stimuli versus the reaction time to irrelevant stimuli, 
essentially measuring the delay in automatic response to a stimulus containing both relevant 
and irrelevant information. To infuse an emotional dimension, these seminal paradigms are 
modified by substituting neutral stimuli with emotionally charged ones, like words 
signifying emotions or emotionally charged terms, such as 'war' or 'holidays', or visual 
stimuli like expressive faces or images eliciting strong emotions, like disgust or sadness 
