40  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Figure 4.4. Screenshot from CREA 
 
Note: An example of crea.tiles, from CREA. B) In the Divergent Thinking mode, participants are asked to 
produce different original shapes of dogs from a limited number of tiles. C) In the Convergent Thinking mode, 
participants are asked to select, from the four options, the shape which will require less moves to be transformed 
into the target shape on the right. 
Source: Adapted from (Rafner et al., 2023[99]), “Towards Game-Based Assessment of Creative Thinking”, 
Creativity Research Journal, Vol. 35/4, pp. 763-782,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10400419.2023.2198845    
Finally, in Crea.ideas, participants are asked to come up with as many creative uses as 
possible for three common objects (a tyre, a brick and a paper clip). The instruction is for 
participants to be 'creative' in their thinking. Participants have two minutes to complete 
each prompt (Rafner et al., 2023[99]). 
In terms of reliability and validity of these tools, Divergent thinking measures in 
Crea.ideas and in Crea.tiles correlate, supporting convergent validity. No correlation was 
found with self-reported measures of Creativity. However, this discrepancy between self-
report and direct measurements of Creativity have been reported by other tools as well. 
While Crea.tiles and Crea.blender are very innovative and promising approaches to 
creativity measurement, data is still lacking regarding their reliability, criterion validity 
and applicability to various populations. However, these tools are still being developed. 
Finally, it worth mentioning that the famous videogame Minecraft has been used to assess 
Creativity (Shaw, 2022[98]). Participants were asked to create original and functional houses 
in the 3D environment of the game. The creations were then rated independently by a jury 
of experts for novelty and usefulness. Correlations were found between self-report scores 
of Creativity and novelty scores based on in-game creations, and novelty and usefulness 
scores had different significant relationships with the Big Five personality traits. 
Critical thinking 
No task-based assessments of Critical thinking were found, defined as ability to question, 
to analyse and evaluate information as a basis for beliefs and actions (Kankaraš and Suarez-
Alvarez, 2019[39]). 
