34  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Social problem-solving 
Social problem-solving, or conflict resolution, is the ability to identify and enact solutions 
to social life situations in an effort to resolve interpersonal problems, conflicts and/or one’s 
relation to these (Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). The review did not identify any 
task-based assessment specifically testing social-problem solving, although the Mayer–
Salovey–Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test Version 2.0 (MSCEIT) and the Mayer–
Salovey–Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test–Youth Version, Research Version 
(MSCEIT-YV) include a task for such skill (see Mixed batteries). 
Trust and Co-operation 
Trust can be defined as “a psychological state comprising the intention to accept 
vulnerability based upon the positive expectations of the intentions or behavior of another” 
(Rousseau et al., 1998[85]). Recently, an important distinction has been made between 
situational Trust (a transient state depending on the context or the task) and dispositional 
Trust or propensity to Trust (an enduring trait) (Evans and Bond, 2020[86]). In this sense, 
Trust understood as a skill should be assessed as transient state Trust, so as the ability of a 
person to trust effectively in certain situations, and not as a natural tendency to trust (more 
related to a personality trait). This review focused on tasks defining Trust as such. 
Co-operation can be defined as the act or process of working together to get something 
done, to achieve a common purpose or mutual benefit, either for an individual being co-
operative or acting cooperatively (Tyler, 2010[87]). Interestingly, some recent economic 
studies have used tasks to distinguish active and reactive co-operation (i.e., non-
exploitation versus non-retaliation) – two aspects of co-operative behaviour associated 
with different basic personality traits (the traits Honesty-Humility and Agreeableness in the 
HEXACO6 model, respectively) (Thielmann, Hilbig and Niedtfeld, 2014[88]). 
Trust and Co-operation, as well as other prosocial behaviours, have been extensively 
studied in economics and other disciplines using economic games. While the number of 
existing tasks is enormous, most of them come from a small set of paradigms that have 
been continuously adapted over the years. Because they change the dynamics of the task, 
but also the ultimate purpose of the game, these adaptations (sometimes very small 
changes) have an important impact on the nature of the behaviour and the associated skill 
that they are designed to assess. Furthermore, these paradigms have been used extensively 
with groups of participants from all demographic backgrounds, in-game decisions and 
behaviours have been correlated with real-life behaviours, and these tasks are usually easy 
to implement both in reality and virtually. However, the often-simplistic efficiency of these 
tasks is a limitation when it comes to distinguishing between specific prosocial skills such 
as Trust and Co-operation. This could limit the potential applicability of these tools for in-
depth assessment of specific skills, unless the design is adapted to specifically differentiate 
between skills. As most economic games are based on analysing the participant’s decision 
to collaborate and therefore to trust or not trust the other player(s), they can also be 
considered as an assessment of Co-operation. Since the task paradigms presented hereafter 
are paradigms tested and adapted many times in many different contexts, specific 
information regarding reliability and validity metrics is not applicable. 
Probably the most famous economic game is the Investment Game, or Trust Game (see 
(Thielmann et al., 2021[89]), for a review of the methodological aspects of this and other 
 
6 HEXACO is a six-dimensional model of human personality, whose factors include honesty-
humility (H), emotionality (E), extraversion (X), agreeableness (A), conscientiousness (C), and 
openness to experience (O) 
