52  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
a more realistic and spontaneous setting, as the partner character also reacts accordingly to 
each action. Other modifications of the game have introduced more complex narrative 
elements, such as separation scenes, where the partner leaves for an indefinite amount of 
time, or conflict scenes, where the partner accuses the player of infidelity. All this to test 
how the players modify their behaviours and interactions with the partner character, 
therefore testing anxiety and loneliness feelings and attachment patterns. In fact, 
researchers have found positive correlations between psychological traits and in-game 
behaviours, for example, by observing that self-reported anxious individuals displayed 
more negative emotional behaviours when interacting with their virtual partners in the 
different socially tense scenarios (Schönbrodt and Asendorpf, 2012[142]).  
As with other games, Simoland is not an operational assessment tool for children in its 
current design since the narrative presentation is targeted at people in current real-life 
relationships. However, as the modifications briefly described above show, due to its 
simple design and customisable dialogue and action options, the game can be easily adapted 
to younger populations, using appropriate narratives. For example, by presenting the other 
creature as a friend or a new colleague in the school, and not as a partner, the skill 
Sociability can be assessed by observing whether the child initiates social contact and how 
it chooses to proceed with the conversation. One can also create specific narratives where 
the other character is in need of help, to assess Empathy, or create certain visual or 
behavioural modifications in the other character so that Tolerance can be measured. 
The several digital games presented in this section provide a representative overview of the 
inventiveness and diversity of conceptual designs and gameplay mechanics that are 
currently available to assess SES. Collectively, they offer an immersive, contextualised, 
interactive and engaging experience through which more authentic behaviours manifest. 
As some of these games are new and experimental, research efforts must continue to 
consolidate them as valid and reliable assessment tools. Nonetheless, this review shows the 
last decade of research has undoubtedly harnessed the potential of digital technologies to 
develop the next generation of innovative assessment tools.  
5. New technological approaches for assessment 
5.1. Biophysiological measures 
Data on human behaviours and abilities can also be obtained through other technology-
based methods, which measure biological and physiological information. Such 
biophysiological measures include data on heart rate activity, cortisol levels in the saliva 
and in the hair, eye movements, skin conductance, brain activity, which can be collected to 
inform of variations in the internal psychological and emotional states of individuals. This 
biophysiological data can then be used as a complementary method for more directly 
assessing individuals’ behaviours and skills, as this information is spontaneous and derives 
from implicit processes people cannot easily control, thus also limiting social desirability 
biases for example (Abrahams et al., 2019[7]). 
The use of assessment tools based on these measurement technologies has expanded and 
diversified as they have become more affordable and portable. However, even though 
accessibility has increased, the complexity and required expertise associated with the setup, 
calibration and synchronisation of these instruments have remained, challenging their 
implementation at large scale. Another challenge lies with the ecological validity of these 
instruments or, in other words, the application of these technologies in authentic settings 
where imponderable variables abound, distant from the tightly controlled laboratory 
settings, where most of these technologies have been developed and applied. Other authors 
