EDU/WKP(2024)11  65 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Within behavioural assessments, however, tests and digital games have different benefits 
and, naturally, not all tasks nor all games present the same assessment quality. A fine-
grained analysis is, therefore, needed. Table 6.1. Comparisons of strengths and challenges 
for tasks and digital games presents summarised information regarding the distinct 
strengths and challenges associated with tasks and with digital games, in the context of SES 
assessment. It includes aspects of ecological validity and immersiveness, reliability and 
validity psychometrics, scope of skills assessed and considerations on feasibility and costs. 
Table 6.1. Comparisons of strengths and challenges for tasks and digital games 
 
Strengths 
Challenges 
Tasks 
• Wide variety of assessment designs 
• Collectively offer a comprehensive coverage of SES 
• Offer more time-efficient measurements, with reduced 
variables and noise, for a quicker and cleaner extraction 
of data 
• Many tasks provide robust reliability and validity 
psychometrics to constitute an assessment alternative to 
self-reports, although they have often not been scaled up 
to international implementation 
• The focus on direct instructions and simple interfaces 
reduces subtilties of social stimuli, narratives and 
contexts, which compromises ecological validity 
• Reliance on a single task to represent complex and 
multifaceted constructs can lead to oversimplification, 
reducing its validity  
• Can overlook the richness of students' SES as 
manifested in different contexts, moments and situations. 
• Cognitive load might create more noise in the data, 
making it harder to isolate variables and measure clearly 
defined SES 
Digital 
Games 
• Wide variety of assessment designs 
• Some can assess multiple SES simultaneously 
• Tend to have higher levels of ecological validity, with 
contextualised storytelling, richer audiovisual elements, 
and greater immersiveness and interactivity 
• Data can be extracted through multiple ways, including 
implicit behaviours under stealth assessment paradigms 
• Often require a significant time to be administered 
• Most games have merely been tested in small 
populations with limited representativeness. 
• Complexity of stimuli and cognitive load might create 
more noise in the data, making it harder to isolate 
variables and measure clearly defined SES 
• Game development is more complex and costly 
 
In this paper, games are distinguished from tasks for having a conducting narrative usually 
anchored in role-playing, or for their non-linear gameplay, whereas tasks present players 
with more direct instructions not contextually embedded in interactive storytelling. This 
distinction allows for the same skills to be assessed in different ways, that reflect their 
complementary facets, as the next examples can demonstrate. Empathy, when assessed 
through the game ZooU (DeRosier, Craig and Sanchez, 2012[128]), is measured as 
Empathetic concern, through actionable choices, for example when choosing to attend to a 
colleague who appears sad instead of engaging in a fun activity during recess. These actions 
occur in an interactive environment with observable impacts in the other characters. On the 
other hand, tasks give straightforward instructions which allow for a direct extraction of 
data on decisions and behaviours, although in a non-interactive environment where the 
social and emotional stimuli are static. For example, when using the MET task (Dziobek 
et al., 2008[83]), Empathy is assessed in its Cognitive and Emotional empathy facets, by 
presenting participants with emotional facial expressions and asking them to identify the 
emotion and then whether they share the same feeling. Similarly, Self-control in the same 
game, ZooU, is assessed as a response to social, external stimuli, through multiple 
actionable choices related to controlling aggressive behaviours, or to do responsible actions 
instead of giving in to distracting impulses, all in contextualised social environments. In 
