EDU/WKP(2024)11  61 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
This is an emerging category, and although a growing number of commercial 
providers are already offering such services (for example, Beamery, Techwolf, 
Empath, or Workera), it is still a very early field and may not be mature and 
developed for SES measurement. 
However, there are currently many limitations, and the scientific literature appears divided 
on issues related to the reliability and ethics of these tools. This is reflected in the large 
number of organisations calling for a comprehensive review of their use in different 
educational sectors, as well as the increasing number of policies enforced by governments 
on this issue, especially in education. For example, the European Commission's AI Act 
(https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai, 
consulted 
5 
February 2024) is the first major step forward at regulating this new era at an 
intergovernmental scale. This regulatory proposal addresses the risks of AI, by providing 
AI developers, implementers and users with clear requirements and obligations regarding 
specific uses of AI. Critically, the regulatory framework defines four levels of risk in AI 
and identifies as high-risk AI technologies used in education or training that can determine 
someone's access to education and career progression (e.g., scoring exams). The proposal 
is part of a broader artificial intelligence package that will ensure the safety and 
fundamental rights of people and companies in AI.  
5.3.1. Methodologies and applications 
Through advanced algorithms, AI systems can sift through vast datasets to identify patterns 
and correlations that human analysts might overlook. Various strands of research, known 
collectively as affective computing, have been developed to enable computational systems 
to recognise, interpret and respond to human emotions (Aranha, Correa and Nunes, 
2021[192]). The tools developed both for assessment analytics and skills inferencing, include 
a wide range of technologies, such as emotion recognition techniques, facial expression 
analysis, gesture recognition, voice recognition or text analysis. They are used to interpret 
facial expressions, body language, voice frequency and intensity, or written content and 
style, which are essential indicators of an individual's emotional states (Westera et al., 
2019[18]). These technologies are also used for social signal processing. Social Signal 
Processing focuses on the automatic detection and interpretation of social signals, which 
are non-verbal cues that can convey socially relevant information (e.g., gestures, eye gaze, 
posture, vocal characteristics, interpersonal distances, facial expressions) (Beyan et al., 
2021[17]). For example, from a social AI perspective, the contraction of a series of facial 
muscles producing a smile can be coded as evidence with a certain probability that a person 
is likely to be experiencing the emotion of happiness or displaying a friendly attitude. These 
approaches enhance the processing of socially and emotionally relevant information, 
potentially improving the assessment of SES.  
Additionally, machine learning models are increasingly employed for personality detection 
(Mehta et al., 2020[193]). Automatic personality detection is a rising field (in terms of 
academic publications) given the large number of industrial applications. As for emotions 
and social interactions, methods for automatic detection of personality include text 
processing, visual processing such as analysis of facial features, audio processing, and 
multimodal processing – which combines inputs from several modalities. Other recent and 
more exotic approaches include, for instance, the use of AI to analyse colour features of 
photos posted on social media to predict personality traits (Khorrami, Khorrami and 
Farhangi, 2022[194]). Visual processing is the most common method and is considered the 
most accurate unimodal prediction. Audio processing is mostly used in combination with 
the visual method. While bimodal predictions remain the most popular, multimodal 
methods have been shown to be so far the most accurate in predicting personality (Mawalim 
