66  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
tasks, assessments usually measure Self-control by expecting participants to focus on 
certain tasks, by dealing with internal impulses and avoiding distractors, with non-complex 
playable interfaces. 
These two skills exemplify how games can offer a socially contextualised assessment of 
SES, with improved ecological validity and higher complexity, whereas tasks offer more 
time-efficient measurements, with reduced variables and noise, for a quicker and cleaner 
extraction of data. These two dimensions are not an automatic advantage or disadvantage, 
as each individual skill might in fact be better assessed by one method or the other. There 
is indeed a trade-off between control/standardisation and complexity/realism, as the more 
realistic and complex the context and stimuli in the assessment, the less controlled the 
assessment becomes, and the harder it might be to isolate individual skills from those 
assessments (Clauser, Margolis and Clauser, 2015[127]). Skills which are usually employed 
in social contexts, such as Empathy, Collaboration, Perspective-taking or Social problem-
solving, are perhaps more robustly assessed in their different subtilties when measured 
through games, which offer higher levels of complexity and immersive social stimuli, 
mimicking real-life situations. On the other hand, skills less dependent on interpersonal 
interactions, such as Self-control, Creativity or Curiosity, might be more efficiently 
assessed with directed tasks which offer more focus and have fewer confounding variables 
by eliminating unnecessary social elements. However, the great majority of the reviewed 
tasks and games have been validated individually, so a direct contrast between them is not 
available for us to firmly conclude which method is the most effective for each skill. What 
is clear is that tasks and games can be framed in a spectrum of simple to complex ecological 
validity, presenting different advantages and disadvantages, which are differently relevant 
for the distinct skills we consider. 
Another critical aspect is the strength of the scientific reliability and validity, which 
constitute the safeguard that assessments are effectively and consistently testing the 
respective skill, while also relating to relevant outcomes. Several tasks, on one hand, have 
been used for a long time, sometimes decades, meaning they have been polished and 
validated in multiple circumstances and populations. Such robustness is reflected on the 
high scores for the various validation criteria we considered (Behavioural Assessment 
Tools for SES). However, even highly validated task-based assessments are usually tested 
in relatively small samples and would benefit from having a large-scale deployment in an 
international context for a wider validation. Game-based assessments, on the other hand, 
tend to be more recent and often experimental. Although promising in their innovative 
design and gameplay, many of them have merely been tested in small populations with 
limited representativeness. Only a few exceptions have simultaneously been validated for 
convergence with other more established measurements, for a relation with academic 
outcomes and prosocial behaviours, for international contexts, and for diverse populations, 
from ethnical and socioeconomic perspectives. 
A notable finding from the research work is that assessments, considering both games and 
tasks, are not evenly distributed across all skills. Skills present in our framework, such as 
Responsibility, Stress Resistance, Tolerance, Assertiveness or Curiosity have none, or only 
one, associated behavioural assessment. In contrast, skills such as Self-control, Emotional 
control, Empathy, Co-operation, Creativity, Perspective-taking and Social problem-solving 
benefit from having a significant number of different tasks and games to assess them. A 
first-order explanation could be that all skills are not easily measurable and, thus, it is 
difficult to rigorously design behavioural assessments for them, resulting in this observed 
discrepancy. However, it could also be the case that different skills have different levels of 
perceived relevance to society, to research and to education, which leads to a differential 
attraction of researchers and funding towards them. The unevenness in the distribution of 
available assessment tools per skill is evident. Whether this finding reflects differential 
