64  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
the collection of a wide range of measures, such as game behaviour (choices and strategies), 
cognitive performance, motor performance, social behaviour and derived affect relevant to 
SES such as Creativity, Social problem-solving, Co-operation, Assertiveness or Empathy, 
among others (Mandryk and Birk, 2019[209]). 
Games like Poptropica (Dicerbo, 2013[210]), for example, rely on the difficulty of tasks in 
order to assess the skill Persistence. While playing this game, elementary- and middle 
school children (6- to 14-year-olds) visit “islands” with various themes and are expected to 
persevere through overarching quests, with multiple challenging tasks, in order to reach 
completion. Using data logs covering the time spent on quest events, the number of quest 
events completed or, more specifically, the maximum time spent on an individual quest 
event successfully completed, researchers can infer about the persistence levels of each 
player. However, unlike with other games discussed in previous sections, researchers have 
not used external measurements to assert the validity of the assessment. This weakens 
firmer conclusions about whether Persistence is exactly the skill being measured, as 
differences in individual performance could be due to cognitive abilities or differential 
motivation to play this particular game. 
Overall, digital footprints and behavioural data from videogames offer an interesting 
opportunity to assess SES, providing insights into authentic behaviours and interactions in 
digital environments. However, while promising, these approaches face similar challenges 
to the use of AI (see section 5.3 Artificial intelligence applications). In addition to obvious 
privacy concerns, particularly with passive footprint data mining, they face challenges 
related to representation bias and interpretation, as well as the challenges of accurately 
interpreting these digital behaviours, which require a careful approach. Given that not all 
demographic groups are equally represented, and that individuals' online personas may not 
fully reflect their real-world selves, it is critical for researchers to implement strategies that 
mitigate these biases and contextualise their findings within the limitations of the data. 
Furthermore, the complexity of deciphering this data without oversimplifying or 
misinterpreting it highlights the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration. Drawing on 
diverse expertise can enhance the analytical process, ensuring that interpretations are 
nuanced and deeply informed by an understanding of the intricacies of digital interactions. 
While these current limitations need to be carefully addressed, analysing digital footprints 
and behavioural residues from videogames holds significant potential for advancing our 
understanding of SES in the digital age. 
6. Review discussion 
6.1. What different benefits tasks and games have to offer? 
The lasts two sections presented a large number of direct assessment tools as well as several 
technological approaches to measure SES, moving beyond self-reports and other-reports, 
to collect more objective data on the authentic behaviours and skills of individuals. The 
diversity of innovative assessment tools mapped and reviewed greatly amplifies the 
portfolio of available assessment methods, which can supplement current, more traditional 
practices. The instruments mapped for this paper also facilitate the exploration of promising 
avenues for assessing SES in the context of an international, summative assessment of 
school-age children. Collectively, task- and game-based assessments combine a wide 
variety of designs with a significant level of immersiveness and interactivity, covering 
almost the full panoply of SES contemplated in the OECD framework. Moreover, they 
allow stealth assessment paradigms that are able to counter various biases and contribute 
to flesh out more authentic behaviours (Shute et al., 2016[211]).  
