EDU/WKP(2024)11  53 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
have shown that physiological reactions in laboratory settings greatly differ from those 
occurring in real-life contexts, namely in situations dealing with stress and emotional 
stimuli. Therefore, a systematic application of these technologies outside the laboratory 
requires solid validation before conclusions regarding psychological states can be firmly 
taken. Moreover, a practical concern associated with the use of biophysical technologies is 
their inherent noise in the data, which then requires a significant number of trials so that a 
strong signal can be extracted. Such need for repeated measurements implicates additional 
time requirements and tests the ability and patience of young children to remain engaged 
with the experimental tasks. Finally, the need to obtain the appropriate consent for health 
data collection from children might constitute an additional practical difficulty. All these 
issues further limit the feasibility of an at-scale collection of biophysiological data, 
particularly in young populations (Dahlstrom-Hakki, Asbell-Clarke and Rowe, 2019[144]; 
Larradet et al., 2020[145]).  
We recognise There exists of biodata relying on electrodermal activity, galvanic skin 
response and facial expressions, as well as various methods to directly test brain activity, 
such as functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) or electroencephalography (EEG) (Nebel and Ninaus, 2019[146]). 
Moreover, the use of wearable smart devices should also be noted, which introduces 
practicality and portability to the same techniques mentioned above, collecting 
measurements on heart rate or brain activity, for example. These electronics are equipped 
with wireless sensors and can be integrated into clothes or accessories, such as smart 
glasses, smartwatches and necklaces, but also head bands, arm bands or chest bands. They 
are particularly applicable to the assessment of anxiety, stress responses and stress 
recovery, thus related to skills like Stress Resistance or Emotional control (González 
Ramírez et al., 2023[147]; Hickey et al., 2021[148]). However, given the multitude of available 
technologies, some yet exploratory or with limited practical applicability outside the 
laboratory, the next paragraphs will focus only on a few examples. Thus, three methods for 
measuring biophysiological data will be introduced and discussed, namely using heart 
activity, eye tracking and cortisol levels, with examples of games which have integrated 
them to assess SES. 
5.1.1. Heart activity 
Data on heart activity is one of the ways biophysiological measures can inform us about 
the internal states of individuals. Even though studies have found blood pressure variations 
to be good predictors of behavioural perseverance measurements (Chauntry, Williams and 
Whittaker, 2019[149]), heart rate variability (HRV) is usually singled out as the most reliable 
indicator (Dormal, Vermeulen and Mejias, 2020[150]). The concept of heart rate relates to 
the number of heart beats per minute, whereas HRV, on the other hand, is a more dynamic 
measure of the time interval variations occurring between consecutive heart beats. The 
heart pumping mechanisms are complex and in constant change, in order to allow for rapid 
cardiovascular adjustments to any internal or external stimuli. HRV can thus be considered 
a valid indicator for assessing internal states and, in particular, the workings of the 
autonomic nervous system. Critically, a dynamic HRV with a wide amplitude has been 
correlated with more efficient emotional regulation mechanisms, stress coping and 
resilience. In practice, this means a cardiovascular system which can efficiently reduce or 
accelerate heart rate in response to changing environments. In contrast, those with limited 
variations in HRV have been associated with stress vulnerability and even with more severe 
psychiatric disorders, such as depression or generalised anxiety (Dormal, Vermeulen and 
Mejias, 2020[150]).  
