EDU/WKP(2024)11  55 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Assuming the obvious need for adjustments so that content is appropriate for children and 
adolescents, without such disturbing stimuli, future game-based assessments could adapt 
this biofeedback principle to induce ethically acceptable levels of frustration or stress. The 
ability of children to exert control over these negative states, and thus influence the game, 
could then be used to measure skills such as Emotional control, yes, but also Self-control 
in less emotionally charged settings, or Stress resistance in time-pressured challenges, for 
example. 
5.1.2. Eye tracking 
Eye movements and fixations can be considered indicators of cognitive and emotional 
processes underlying spatial and visual analysis, attention allocation, engagement, as well 
as metacognition or emotional states, such as anxiety or fear. In more detail, eye tracking 
strategies involve collecting data on different dimensions of gaze, such as eye position and 
eye movement, which correspond, respectively, to measures on fixation and saccade. As 
suggested by the name, fixations represent very brief pauses in eye movement, allowing 
for the eye to properly percept a certain object. A practical example of its use includes 
associating variations in fixation duration of participants with their focus on more relevant 
visual information and, with that, better performance in a certain laboratory task. Saccades, 
on the other hand, refer to rapid eye movements between different fixation points. For 
example, eye tracking headsets which can detect eye movement and fixation points during 
certain tasks can be used to infer information about processing difficulty or attention, which 
can, in turn, be a proxy for motivation and engagement. These eye tracking technologies 
have been also applied to children to understand cognitive abilities and learning processes 
and have proved able to capture subtle changes in gaze occurring over the course of a brief 
training session. An advantage of this method is that eye tracking can be simultaneously 
informative about what is being observed and when, with a high level of spatial and 
temporal accuracy. Even though these devices have become increasingly portable, data 
synchronisation still limits their application outside laboratory-controlled conditions. It is 
worth mentioning that eye tracking technologies have been also applied to children to 
understand cognitive abilities and learning processes and have shown this technology 
captures subtle changes in gaze which happens over the course of a brief training session       
(Dahlstrom-Hakki, Asbell-Clarke and Rowe, 2019[144]; Fletcher-Watson and Hampton, 
2018[153]; Rappa et al., 2022[154]). 
Interesting experiments with eye tracking have included a study exposing participants to 
affective image and video stimuli and using their gaze behavioural responses to infer and 
predict personality traits, by using machine learning algorithms (Berkovsky et al., 
2019[155]). Eye activity included multiple sub-indicators, such as the aforementioned 
number of eye blinks, saccades and fixations, but also pupillary dilation measures. With 
the important limitation of a small sample size, researchers reported that using these ocular 
physiological responses to affective visual stimuli alone all personality traits were predicted 
with an accuracy between 80% and 90%. These personality traits include those present in 
the Big Five and the HEXACO models of personality, namely Agreeableness, 
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Honesty, Resiliency and Openness  (Berkovsky et al., 
2019[155]).  
Eye tracking has also employed to assess SES. It should be mentioned that a great number 
of studies using eye tracking to predict SES focus on Emotion Recognition, and do so by 
focusing on populations suffering from neuropsychiatric disorders, such as autism 
spectrum disorder (Black et al., 2017[156]; Wieckowski and White, 2017[157]). Beyond that, 
researchers have also found a relation between Curiosity and eye movements, albeit with a 
very small sample of only women. In this experiment, people who self-reported to be more 
