EDU/WKP(2024)11  41 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
4.1.6. Self-reflection 
Metacognition 
Despite the widening debate about what Metacognition actually is and how it should be 
assessed, it is generally understood as a multifaceted ensemble of processes related to 
awareness, knowledge and understanding of inner processes and subjective experiences, 
such as thoughts and feelings (Gascoine, Higgins and Wall, 2017[106]). Understood as a 
skill, Metacognition is the ability to reflect on, articulate and deliberately control such 
experiences (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]). Metacognition has been 
approached by many disciplines and is conceptually related to several concepts such as 
executive function, Self-control and Emotional control (Gascoine, Higgins and Wall, 
2017[106]), or Perspective taking and Cognitive empathy. While the debate around the exact 
nature of Metacognition goes beyond the scope of this work, it is important to acknowledge 
that many of its facets are generally associated with foundational cognitive processes. 
Various approaches exist for assessing these cognitive processes; however, the focus of 
this research was to identify tools that assess aspects of Metacognition with an emotional 
feature. 
The Levels of Emotional Awareness Scale (LEAS) (Lane and Smith, 2021[107]) and the 
Levels of Emotional Awareness Scale – Children (LEAS-C) (Bajgar et al., 2005[108]) are 
two tasks designed to assess adults’ and children’s ability to recognise and describe their 
own emotions (Emotional awareness, Metacognition), and the emotions of others 
(Perspective-taking, Empathy). Developed over thirty years ago, the LEAS has been 
extensively tested for validity and reliability (for a review see for example (Siegling, 
Saklofske and Petrides, 2015[109]) and adapted into a digitalised tool. The scale's 
effectiveness and reliability have been supported by extensive research across healthy and 
clinical populations, demonstrating its significance in understanding emotional self-
regulation, social adaptation, and overall mental and physical health. This assessment 
involves presenting individuals with a series of hypothetical but relatable scenarios 
covering a range of emotional contexts, such as social interactions, achievements, losses, 
and ethical dilemmas (Lane and Smith, 2021[107]). Each scenario is a brief description of a 
situation that involves interpersonal interactions or personal experiences likely to generate 
emotions. The key aspect of the LEAS is that it does not directly ask respondents to identify 
or choose emotions from a given list. Instead, it requires them to describe in their own 
words what they would feel in the situation described, as well as what any other person 
involved in the scenario might feel. The open-ended responses are then scored based on the 
level of emotional awareness they reflect, according to a specific scoring system. The 
scoring focuses on the structure and differentiation of the emotion words used rather than 
their content or appropriateness. The total LEAS score is calculated by summing the scores 
across all scenarios, providing a measure of the individual’s overall level of emotional 
awareness. Higher scores indicate greater Emotional awareness, including the ability to 
recognise and describe complex and nuanced emotional states in oneself and others. A large 
amount of research using this tool exists, making it a well-validated tool. LEAS shows good 
estimates of internal consistency and test-retest reliability. Scores in the assessment have 
been correlated with scores from other tools measuring similar constructs, as well as with 
various outcomes (criterion validity). 
Self-efficacy and Self-esteem 
Self-efficacy is defined as “the strength of individuals’ beliefs in their ability to execute 
tasks and achieve goals” (Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). The literature search 
pointed out to a related concept, namely Self-esteem, defined as “the perception of oneself 
