EDU/WKP(2024)11  67 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
easiness of measurement, subtle cultural and intellectual biases of interest from researchers, 
or contrasting social perceptions of the relevance of these skills, is difficult to judge. 
 
6.2. The (limited) potential of transversal technological approaches to assess SES 
Transversal technologies which can transversally be implemented in the context of task- 
and game-based assessments, for greater richness and quality of SES assessment, were also 
explored in this paper. Table 6.2 contrasts and summarises the strengths and challenges 
associated with the different technological approaches which can be used to assess SES. 
The use of biophysiological measures offer, by principle, less biased data compared to self-
reports or even behavioural tests, since our heartrate, hormone levels or spontaneous gaze 
are not under our direct control (Ketonen et al., 2023[212]; Richardson et al., 2020[213]). 
Technologies such as VR and AR can potentiate immersiveness and ecological validity, 
when compared to playing digitalised tasks or games in front of a 2D screen (Giglioli et al., 
2017[214]). AI technologies are widely regarded as a hallmark of the future and its 
permeation into education appears indisputable  (Chiu et al., 2023[215]; Cope, Kalantzis and 
Searsmith, 2021[216]). Therefore, their use in educational assessment cannot be ignored, as 
AI manifests its potential in different dimensions, from assessment design to a more 
efficient and sophisticated analysis of various types of data. 
Even though all these technologies offer complementary benefits to SES assessment, each 
of them also introduces additional challenges and limitations. From the non-linear 
relationship between biodata and skills or behaviours, to the need for specialised staff and 
equipment for its collection, which limits the large-scale application of biophysiological 
measures for assessment. Although VR and AR potentially offer more immersive and 
realistic experiences, they lack the upper hand when contrasted with tasks and digital games 
that, even though come in classical 2D format, have been subject to much more validation 
scrutiny. Moreover, even though AI for assessment analytics and for skills inferencing hold 
many promises and their incorporation into education and assessment is realistically 
unavoidable, at this point their unconsolidated state, limited validation studies and ethical 
concerns form sufficient obstacles to limit their clear recommendation. 
