EDU/WKP(2024)11  49 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
4.3.4. Questions Worlds – Curiosity 
Dealing with unexpected events and, thus, being open to different experiences, ideas and 
behaviours are leveraging qualities in a multicultural world where globalised 
communication and digitalisation have bridged people together and multiplied the 
opportunities for interaction and communion. Being curious about what surrounds us is the 
first step to deal with all that novelty and, to that end, Questions Worlds was designed to 
assess the skill Curiosity for children between the ages of 11 and 15, based on the rationale 
that more curious children tend to ask distinct types of questions, that are more specific 
(Tor and Gordon, 2020[137]). In the game, children encounter alien worlds that they can 
explore according to their own interests, by freely interacting with the aliens, indigenous 
plants or pieces of technology present in that world (see Figure 4.7).  
Figure 4.7. Screenshots from Questions Worlds 
 
Note: In Questions Worlds, students visit five different alien worlds, each with new environments, creatures, 
plants and objects. They are prompted to click on these different agents, which pops up pre-set questions they 
can ask, in order to learn more about them. These questions include “How does it work?” or “What is it made 
of?” and, importantly, students are limited by time or by the type of question they can ask in any given world. 
The rationale for assessment is that the sort of questions students decide to ask reflects their curiosity skills. 
Source: Adapted from (Tor and Gordon, 2020[137]), “Digital interactive quantitative curiosity assessment tool: 
Questions worlds”, International Journal of Information and Education Technology, Vol. 10/8, pp. 614-621, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.18178/ijiet.2020.10.8.1433 
When selecting these objects, children can then choose which questions to ask, such as 
“How does it work?”; “What is it made of?” or “Why is it here?”. The objects and 
respective questions are part of a specific underlying story arc that, then, leads to the 
appearance subsequent questions children can ask or new objects with which children can 
interact. A critical element of the game is that children are given specific limitations which 
both incentivise Curiosity and condition them to steer it in a productive way. For example, 
players face different restrains in the five different worlds they visit, sometimes they are 
given only 60 seconds to explore the world and its objects, other times they can only ask 5 
questions or ask multiple questions but of a single type (only questions starting with “why” 
or “how”, but not both). This design prompts children to be judicious in the sort of questions 
they ask and stimulates an active and productive Curiosity. Regarding how the skill 
Curiosity is assessed, the researchers established different parameters for each question 
available in game, such as Breath (number of answers to that question), Depth (number of 
new questions which can arise from the given answer) and Specificity (how many other 
