EDU/WKP(2024)11  57 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
biological marker for different internal skills such as stress resilience or emotional control. 
In fact, ineffective regulation of cortisol responses to stress or emotional pressure shows 
correlations with lower levels of emotional well-being (de Vries, van de Weijer and Bartels, 
2022[165]; James et al., 2023[166]; Walker et al., 2017[167]). Additionally, it has been 
suggested cortisol can indeed be used as biomarker for psychiatric disorders such as anxiety 
or depression, including in young populations (Špiljak et al., 2022[168]). Although cortisol 
runs in the blood, a major advantage of this method is that its collection can be made using 
non-invasive sampling, with the resort to salivary cortisol, which correlates well with the 
correspondent blood levels (Hellhammer, Wüst and Kudielka, 2009[169]). However, it 
should be pointed out that, even though higher levels of salivary cortisol are usually 
associated with poorer emotional and behavioural responses, there is not a linear correlation 
between these two variables and the associations are far more complex. As such, other 
relevant indicators include awakening cortisol levels and daily slopes, which allow a better 
mapping of the correlations with the physiological state of the individuals. It is important 
to note that cortisol levels are also subject to secretion cycles dependant on internal and 
individual circadian patterns7, unrelated to the impact of stressors, which can confound 
conclusions regarding the effect of stressful stimuli. Additionally, individual variations are 
also affected by age and sex, as well as eating, sleep and physical activity factors, all of 
which must be considered when planning the most reliable and harmonised periods for 
sample collection, in order to guarantee consistency across individuals (Golub et al., 
2019[170]; Keil, 2012[171]). 
Some research groups have also looked at the comparison between salivary cortisol and 
cortisol levels in hair follicles, that in turn reflect accumulated cortisol over periods of 
weeks or months, and found correlations between these two indicators to be inconsistent. 
Although hair follicle cortisol offers the advantage of giving a larger picture of cortisol 
secretion profiles of individuals and how they manage stress over time, it does not allow to 
test stress responses to acute stress-inducing events or stimuli like salivary cortisol does       
(Golub et al., 2019[170]; Joseph, Jiang and Zilioli, 2021[172]; Zhang et al., 2018[173]). 
Constituting a rather simple collecting procedure while allowing for multiple and 
consecutive sample collections, salivary cortisol has been widely used in both adult and 
child research to understand patterns of cortisol secretion in response to stress-inducing 
laboratory experiments but also in non-clinical environments. Stress-inducing stimuli 
usually activate the neuroendocrine system to secrete cortisol, with its peak levels arising 
15 to 30 minutes after the initial activation, a time dimension which should be considered 
when collecting samples for analysis. Another positive aspect for its feasibility is that 
salivary cortisol samples remain stable and reliable after collection for up to 7 days of 
storage, with no need for freezing (Katz et al., 2016[174]; Keil, 2012[171]). 
Together, the different biophysiological measurement techniques presented in this section, 
that can be incorporated into tasks and games, offer multiple avenues for innovation and 
for enriching the data associated with SES assessment. However, they also pose new 
challenges, regarding the limited scope of skills they currently assess, the costs associated 
with some of the equipment, the complexity inherent to biodata for SES inferencing, and 
the limited applicability of these technologies for large-scale implementation. 
 
7 Circadian rhythms are any periodic variation in physiological or behavioural activity that repeats 
at approximately 24-hour intervals (Source: American Psychological Association, Dictionary of 
Psychology) 
