12  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
behaviour effectively assessed. Nonetheless, SJTs can also be framed as an evolution from 
traditional self-reports, composed of simple statements and Likert scales, towards a more 
direct assessment of SES, as they present hypothetical, contextualised, complex and, thus, 
more realistic social situations. Moreover, in these scenarios, participants are often 
expected to analyse the behaviours of others and select courses of action other social agents 
should follow to achieve certain outcomes (Zhuang et al., 2008[20]; Patterson et al., 
2012[21]). Therefore, SJTs are presented in this paper as an incremental step towards more 
direct measurement approaches. 
These behavioural tests are widely used in professional settings, namely for recruitment 
purposes, and, as mentioned above, allow the assessment of more subtle and complex 
judgement processes than typical self-reported questionnaires  (Zhuang et al., 2008[20]; 
Patterson et al., 2012[21]). Test-takers are usually asked to select the most appropriate choice 
from a pre-determined pool of options, regarding the correct interpretation of the situation 
and the most prosocial course of action to overcome a certain problem. Alternative response 
modalities include ordering the options according to their effectiveness or individually 
ranking their effectiveness on Likert‐type scales (Corstjens, Lievens and Krumm, 2017[22]). 
Such a description bears similarities with tasks and games (discussed in Section 4 ) which 
tackle the skills Perspective-taking and Social problem-solving. However, the judgment of 
social situations in the more innovative assessment tools either allows for open-ended 
responses or is integrated into digitalised audiovisual tasks, or even gamified into narrative-
driven immersive experiences. As such, the SJTs described and discussed in this section 
cover more classical, analogic and paper-based assessment tools, where the social scenarios 
are presented in written vignettes without any audiovisual stimuli. For this reason, and since 
the aim of this paper is to focus on more innovative assessment tools with higher ecological 
validity, namely tasks and digital games, only three SJTs are presented in this subsection, 
to give readers a flavour of their different contents and designs. 
These classical SJTs carry an advantage since they have been extensively used and, thus, 
their reliability and validity metrics are more consolidated, when compared to newly 
developed innovative tasks and games (Corstjens, Lievens and Krumm, 2017[22]). A clear 
downside is a certain compromise of ecological validity since the social situations 
presented are all descriptive, lacking nuances related to speech and tone and even social 
perception of non-verbal communication, such as facial and body expressions, which other 
immersive tools can offer. However, it should be noted that recent efforts have attempted 
to incorporate multimedia elements to SJTs, including 3D animations and motion-capture 
techniques. These provide increments to the realism and the fidelity of stimuli of the social 
situations being presented, in a greater alignment with the task- and game-based 
assessments described later in this paper (Weekley et al., 2015[23]). 
The Situational Test of Emotional Understanding (STEU) describes social and emotional 
situations, occurring in specific personal life and workplace contexts or presented in a more 
abstract and context-reduced setting, that can occur to any individual (MacCann and 
Roberts, 2008[24]). For each scenario, it offers test-takers five possible emotional words 
asking which the most probable emotion felt in such circumstances. Overall, the 42 
different scenarios in STEU cover 17 different discrete emotions, which can be considered 
a measurement for Perspective-taking skills. One example of such scenario is: "An 
unwanted situation becomes less likely or stops altogether. The person involved is most 
likely to feel: (a) regret, (b) hope, (c) joy, (d) sadness, (e) relief", with the last option being 
considered the correct answer.  
The paired Situational Test of Emotional Management (STEM), on the other hand, 
presents brief social and emotional situations and participants are asked which of four 
options could best manage the emotions of the people in the scenario, leading to a more 
