EDU/WKP(2024)11  23 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
4.1. Tasks 
Task-based assessments measure specific SES using all sorts of quantitative and qualitative 
behavioural data, ranging from nature of choices to number of responses to reaction times. 
But unlike game-based assessments, task-based assessments present individuals with direct 
instructions that are not contextually embedded in interactive storytelling. 
The use of task-based assessments to measure SES has the clear advantage of providing 
observable, quantifiable behaviours that reflect an individual's ability to perform in specific 
situations. These tasks are designed to elicit meaningful differences in behaviour under 
controlled conditions, thus providing a direct measure of an individual's ability in a 
particular domain without relying on their subjective judgements, thus avoiding the 
challenge of accurately self-reporting complex internal states. Task-based assessments are 
also advantageous because they limit common pitfalls of self-report measures, such as 
social desirability bias and reference bias. Finally, task-based assessments can be more 
sensitive to subtle changes over time compared to self-reports, making them valuable for 
tracking progress and assessing the impact of SEL interventions (Abrahams et al., 2019[7]; 
Duckworth and Yeager, 2015[38]). 
On the other hand, task-based assessments also have significant limitations (Abrahams 
et al., 2019[7]; Duckworth and Yeager, 2015[38]). Compared with paper-and-pencil 
questionnaires, they can be logistically difficult to administer and require carefully 
controlled conditions that may not reflect a student's typical environment. This artificiality 
may limit the generalisability of results to real-world settings, where students may use 
strategies to avoid or cope with challenging situations that are not available in a test setting. 
Furthermore, tasks may suffer from 'task impurity', where the behaviour observed is 
influenced by factors irrelevant to the construct being measured, such as a student's physical 
coordination, familiarity with the test format (e.g., digital literacy for computer-based 
assessments), or more general cognitive functioning. In addition, these tasks are susceptible 
to practice effects, where repeated exposure to the task affects performance independently 
of the trait being assessed. Finally, reliance on a single or small set of tasks to represent 
complex and multifaceted constructs can lead to oversimplification, overlooking the 
variability and richness of students' SES as manifested in different contexts and situations. 
For the sake of clarity, due to the large number of tasks reviewed, this section is organised 
by presenting the available assessment tools according to the five OECD domains of SES 
(Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]), and then per skill (see Figure 4.1). Skills for 
which strong similarities in assessment tools were found are discussed together. A sixth 
category of skills, referred to as 'Self-reflection', includes self-reflective skills that were 
(see Annex A: Search terms for SES) for the description of the domains and the full list of 
skills and keywords reviewed). Importantly, this organisation should not be considered a 
proposed taxonomy for SES, which falls outside the scope of this work. 
