14  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
list of tools reviewed is presented in an online table (Behavioural Assessment Tools for 
SES), and a large part of these instruments are described in section 4 and section 5. 
Since the purpose of this work is to identify and map new tools and assessment approaches, 
self-report or other-report questionnaires were not reviewed, and SJTs were not reviewed 
consistently (see section 2.2). The review focuses extensively on Behaviour-based 
assessment tools, but also covers transversal technological approaches for innovative 
assessments, including Biophysiological measurements, VR and AR, AI applications, and 
analysis of Digital footprints and behavioural measures from videogames. 
These broad categories have been chosen for practical reasons/readability, and we 
acknowledge that some tools and approaches contain elements that would fit in several of 
them. Indeed, the categorisation presented here should not be considered as a formal 
taxonomy regarding the organisation of assessment types. Also, a vast literature was 
identified for each of these assessment approaches, along with significant differences 
regarding their current scientific reliability and validity and practical applicability. 
Therefore, in section 4, we opted to present in detail a number of tools within the 
behavioural-based assessments, while section 5 gives a larger overview of the state of the 
art for the remaining technological approaches.  
3.1. Review methodology 
Firstly, to map the state of the art of the field and identify research trends, we conducted a 
general search, using Google Scholar (https://scholar.google.com/) as our primary 
academic search engine. We looked for combinations of the terms “social and emotional 
skills” OR “life skills” OR “social-emotional competencies” with general types of 
assessment or approach, such as “behaviour-based assessments”, “biophysiological data” 
(including “heart activity”, “cortisol”, “eye tracking”), “virtual reality”, “augmented 
reality”, “artificial intelligence”, “digital footprint” and “behavioural residue”. Initially, we 
looked for these combinations in the articles' titles and abstracts. We identified and 
reviewed relevant articles relating SES to each assessment tool type and each approach. 
Given the large number of results in favour of behaviour-based assessments, we conducted 
a second round of search, more refined and systematic, to identify behaviour-based 
assessments of all individual SES, using Google Scholar. The search strings were designed 
by combining two components, the names of the individual SES followed by iterations of 
the different subtypes of assessments. The first string component, the search terms for the 
individual SES, derived primarily from the framework of the OECD Survey on Social and 
Emotional Skills (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]), to which synonyms 
were added from the Concept notes of Future of Education and Skills 2030 (OECD, 
Forthcoming[30]) 
and 
from 
Harvard’s 
ExploreSEL 
online 
comparative 
tool 
(http://exploresel.gse.harvard.edu/compare-terms/) (for the full list of search keywords, see 
Annex A: Search terms for SES). The second search string component, the assessment type, 
started with a first search round involving a general reference to “behavioural assessment” 
or “behaviour-based assessment”, after which searching iterations were run for specific 
behavioural approaches using “game”, “game-based assessment”, “task” and “task-based 
assessment”. As an example, the search strings for “Self-control” were all possible 
combinations of: Self-control / self-discipline + behavioural assessment / behaviour-based 
assessment / game / game-based assessment / task / task-based assessment.  
Aside from Google Scholar, additional behaviour-based assessments were identified 
through 
the 
SEL 
assessment 
compendia 
RAND 
Assessment 
Finder 
(https://www.rand.org/education-and-labor/projects/assessments/tool.html) and using a 
snowballing approach. 
