8  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
1. Introduction 
Social and emotional skills (SES) play a critical role in education and society, and there is 
widespread agreement regarding their importance for so many dimensions of our individual 
and collective lives (Jones and Kahn, 2017[1]). Defined as characteristics that manifest in 
maximal behaviours rather than typical ones (see Box 1.1), research shows SES are 
predictive of a wide range of key life outcomes, such as academic achievement and mental 
health, but also job performance and civic engagement. Critically, SES are also proven 
teachable through specific educational interventions, which grants schools a pivotal role in 
their development (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]). These findings 
justify an increasing incorporation of SES into the curricula of many education systems 
around the world, targeting students from kindergarten through the end of secondary school 
(Cipriano et al., 2023[3]; OECD, 2020[4]). 
Box 1.1. Definition of social and emotional skills, as defined by the OECD 
Social and emotional skills: Individual characteristics that are:  
• 
expressed in repeatable patterns of thoughts, feelings and behaviours;  
• 
manifested in maximal behaviour, or maximal capabilities, more than typical 
behaviour (and therefore distinct from personality traits);  
• 
dependent on situational factors (e.g. motivation, task context, fatigue);  
• 
subject to developmental change and genetic predispositions; 
• 
teachable/responsive to intervention;  
• 
predictive of key life outcomes;  
• 
conceptually distinct from foundational cognitive processes (e.g. visual 
processing, attention, memory retrieval) and academic skills (e.g. literacy, 
numeracy) 
Source: (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 2023[2]), “Social and emotional skills: Latest evidence 
on teachability and impact on life outcome”, OECD Education Working Papers, No. 304, OECD 
Publishing, Paris, http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/ba34f086-en   
However, many social and emotional learning (SEL) programmes and interventions are 
implemented without any associated robust assessment methods that measure their 
effectiveness and their impact on specific SES. A seminal meta-analysis reviewed more 
than 200 SEL programmes and identified that a significant proportion lacked reliable and 
valid outcome measurements (Durlak et al., 2011[5]). Even after more than a decade later, 
a recent survey shows that implementers of SEL programmes state the absence of adequate 
evaluation methods as the second most relevant challenge (OECD, 2023[6]). Identifying and 
designing scientifically solid assessment methods for measuring SES and, thus, the impact 
of SEL interventions is therefore an urgent necessity. Current methods to assess SEL 
programmes or to measure these skills at an individual level rely heavily on the use of self-
reports or teacher-reports (Cipriano et al., 2023[3]). Although offering insightful 
information, these indirect measurements carry multiple biases and are limited in providing 
comparable and objective information (Abrahams et al., 2019[7]). Consequently, there is a 
need to expand and diversify the portfolio of available assessment measures, to include 
direct measurements for assessing SES, namely looking at behavioural and performance 
