EDU/WKP(2024)11  39 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
individuals to hypothesise about unlikely scenarios, testing their tolerance for and 
playfulness with unusual situations. This battery assesses fluency, flexibility and 
originality within a 45-minute timeframe. The Figural battery of the TTCT consists of three 
tasks that require very little writing (Alabbasi et al., 2022[104]). The Picture construction 
task requires the subject to draw a picture based on a given stimulus. The Picture 
completion task requires the subject to draw a picture using incomplete figures and to title 
each drawing. The Repeated line (or circle) task requires the subject to draw a picture using 
pairs of lines or circles given as stimuli. The Figural Battery assesses students' fluency, 
originality, abstractness of titles, elaboration, resistance to premature closure, and the 
Checklists of Creativity Strengths in 30 minutes. While the evidence for the reliability of 
the TTCT and similar tests is fairly strong, the predictive and discriminant validity (i.e., the 
lack of correlation with irrelevant measures) of divergent thinking tests is still debated in 
the literature (Rafner et al., 2023[99]). 
The CREA suite is a more recent and more holistic approach to the direct assessment of 
creative skills (Rafner et al., 2023[99]). Still under development, this digital assessment 
portfolio consists of a series of tests designed to assess divergent and convergent thinking 
in a variety of ways to capture different aspects of Creativity. While divergent thinking is 
defined as the ability to come up with many different solutions to a prompt, convergent 
thinking is defined as the ability to find the single best (or correct) option within a space 
of solutions. The CREA suite includes Crea.tiles and Crea.blender – non-verbal tests of 
both divergent and convergent thinking, and Crea.ideas – an adaptation of the Alternative 
Uses Task, a standard test of divergent thinking. The CREA suite includes another tool, 
Crea.logic, a non-verbal test designed to test general abstract reasoning, thus ensuring that 
the creative abilities being measured are distinct from general reasoning (controlling for 
divergent validity). 
Crea.tiles is an adaptation of the Creative Foraging Game. In this non-verbal assessment, 
participants create shapes on a grid of ten squares, aiming to design aesthetically pleasing 
forms within a set time (see Figure 4.4). The game features two modes: Divergent thinking 
and Convergent thinking. In the divergent thinking mode, players form various shapes 
across different categories within a limited time, while the convergent thinking mode 
challenges them to transform a starting shape into a target figure in the fewest steps and 
shortest time, with challenges of increasing difficulty. 
In contrast to Crea.tiles, Crea.blender is a co-creative (human-machine) task that allows 
players to blend or merge existing images into new ones using AI (Rafner et al., 2020[105]). 
It works on the principle of constraint-based combinational creativity, visually allowing 
for creative outcomes. When mixing images in Crea.blender, participants use sliders to 
indicate how much each image should contribute to the resulting image. Apart from the 
underlying differences in the game mechanics, the task and prompt design have been 
retained as much as possible to maintain contextual homogeneity between the two sub-
challenges. The game has three modes: Creatures Mode, where players have five minutes 
to create as many “animal-like” creatures as possible from six images; Challenge Mode, 
where players have three minutes to identify and recreate a target image from a set of 
source images; and Open Play Mode, which asks the players to create and save during five 
minutes any image they find interesting from the same image sources as in Creatures Mode. 
This versatile platform is designed to provide a playful, engaging environment for 
assessing creativity, facilitating both divergent and convergent thinking studies. 
