26  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
vary among individuals and be influenced by cognitive abilities, age, gender, or 
psychological conditions such as anxiety or depression. 
Figure 4.2. Emotional Stroop Task 
 
Note: In one version of the Emotional Stroop task, participants are asked to respond to the writing colour of a 
series of items presented without considering the meaning of these words. Performance is measured as the 
difference in response times between a block of neutral items (left) and a block of emotional items (right). 
Responsibility 
No task assessing Responsibility defined as the desire and ability to “follow through with 
promises to others” (Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]) were identified. 
Persistence, Achievement motivation, and Grit 
Very little research was found on direct measurements of Persistence. Defined as the 
ability to persevere in tasks and activities until they get done (Chernyshenko, Kankaraš and 
Drasgow, 2018[40]; Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]), Persistence is a very task-
specific skill. As such, it is for example tested by the Mirror Tracing Frustration Task 
(Meindl et al., 2019[45]) as the proportion of time that participants allocate between a 
difficult and frustrating task (which requires tracing the outline of a shape by looking at its 
reflection through a physical mirror) and a “distractor”, more enjoyable, task (looking at 
entertaining videos and playing games). Despite its short duration (the test lasts 5 minutes), 
this measure was correlated with self-reported measures of similar constructs, including 
Self-control and Grit, as well as real-world academic achievement outcomes (Zamarro 
et al., 2020[46]) (Meindl et al., 2019[45]). Internal consistency estimates of the measure are 
also reported. More generally, Persistence can also be inferred from process data or 
paradata (e.g., time spent on a task, or total number of actions) in assessments that target 
completely different constructs. Therefore, Persistence measures could also be built from 
some other behaviour assessment tasks presented in this review. 
Achievement motivation is a skill conceptually related to Persistence. Achievement 
motivation is understood as the ability to set high standards for oneself and work hard to 
meet them by putting in consistent effort and being highly productive (Kankaraš and 
Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). The EMOTICOM battery (Bland et al., 2016[42]) proposes an 
adapted Monetary Incentive Reward Task and an adapted Progressive Ratio Task to assess 
