EDU/WKP(2024)11  27 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Incentive motivation, a facet of Motivation and reward. Incentive motivation tests measure 
how much effort an individual is prepared to exert to gain reward. The monetary incentive 
reward task assesses effort to avoid punishment and gain reward, and the progressive ratio 
task identifies the maximum effort that a participant will expend in order to receive a reward 
(Bland et al., 2016[42]). In terms of reliability and validity, these two neuropsychological 
tasks are initially destined to assess clinical conditions of patients with neuropsychiatric 
disorders. The tasks of the EMOTICOM battery (Bland et al., 2016[42]) were also tested on 
volunteers with no self-reported previous or current psychiatric disorders, but as a control 
condition. There is the need to assess the discriminant power of such tasks in the broader 
population. Preliminary data presented in the publication showed low test/retest reliability 
of the monetary incentive task. 
A third highly related concept is Grit. In the literature, Grit is defined as “perseverance and 
passion for long-term goals [and] not just resilience in the face of failure, but also having 
deep commitments that [one] remain[s] loyal to over many years” (Duckworth et al., 
2007[47]). In contrast to Self-control, Grit is distinguished by its emphasis on effort and 
interest sustained over months and years rather than minutes and hours (Galla et al., 
2014[48]). Grit is commonly defined as a complex trait that encompasses two key 
components: “Perseverance of effort” and “Consistency of interest” (Credé, Tynan and 
Harms, 2017[49]). While “Perseverance of effort” seems to relate to the Persistence skill of 
the OECD framework, “Consistency of interest” seems to be aligned with the Achievement 
motivation skill of the OECD framework (Steponavičius, Gress-Wright and Linzarini, 
2023[2]). This two-dimensional structure of Grit is evident in the design of one of the main 
self-assessment tools used to evaluate it: the Grit Scale (Duckworth et al., 2007[47]) and the 
Short Grit Scale (Duckworth and Quinn, 2009[50]). These aspects are also present in 
assessments using compound measures for evaluating Grit. Sutter and colleagues (Sutter, 
Untertrifaller and Zoller, 2022[51]), for example, combine three different choices of children 
on (i) perseverance as an ability to work hard, (ii) the willingness to challenge oneself by 
choosing voluntarily a more difficult task when given the choice, and (iii) the likelihood to 
follow through with that task until completion. 
However, the literature is divided regarding the usefulness of conceptualising Grit as a 
higher-order construct characterised by two lower-order facets. Some research 
underscores: a lack of strong methodological evidence for a higher-order factor structure 
in Grit; a general loss in predictive power when combining perseverance and consistency 
scores; Grit's modest correlation with academic performance, which is weaker compared 
to established predictors like cognitive ability or study habits; and finally, Grit's strong 
overlap with Conscientiousness and Self-control. This suggests that Grit might merely be 
a rebranding of existing constructs rather than a unique predictor of performance (Credé, 
Tynan and Harms, 2017[49]). A recent systematic review (Fernández-Martín, Arco-Tirado 
and Hervás-Torres, 2020[52]) indicates that research on Grit needs more systematic and 
rigorous methodologies, and although there is evidence supporting Grit as a predictor of 
success in education, profession, and personal life (Lechner, Danner and Rammstedt, 
2019[53]), the limited number and/or quality of studies hinder definitive causal conclusions. 
The review suggests the need for stronger, more comparable evidence in the field of Grit 
research. 
The Academic Diligence Task was created to assess Academic diligence defined as 
“working assiduously on academic tasks which are beneficial in the long-run but tedious 
in the moment, especially in comparison to more enjoyable, less effortful diversions” (Galla 
et al., 2014[48]). The authors of the task relate this construct to Grit and Self-control. The 
Academic Diligence Task is a behavioural measure designed to assess the allocation of time 
and effort between a beneficial yet monotonous math skill-building activity and engaging 
distractions such as video games or YouTube clips (e.g., music videos, movie trailers). This 
