EDU/WKP(2024)11  85 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Annex A: Search terms for SES 
Annex Table 1. OECD SES Domains, key individual SES and their equivalent search terms 
SES domains 
SES 
SES synonyms / associated keywords 
Task performance 
(Conscientiousness) 
Self-control 
Self-discipline 
Responsibility 
Trustworthiness 
Persistence 
Perseverance 
Achievement motivation 
Mastery skills 
Emotion regulation 
(Emotional stability) 
Stress Resistance 
Resilience, Stress coping, Anxiety 
(antagonist term) 
Optimism 
Positive emotion 
Emotional control 
Emotional stability 
 
Collaboration 
(Agreeableness) 
Empathy  
Compassion 
Trust  
- 
Co-operation 
Collaboration 
Open-mindedness 
(Openness to experience) 
Tolerance 
Respect, Cultural flexibility 
Curiosity 
- 
Creativity 
Imagination, Flexible thinking 
Engaging with others 
(Extraversion) 
Sociability 
- 
Assertiveness 
Dominance, Leadership 
Energy 
Enthusiasm 
Supplementary skills 
Critical thinking 
Independence 
Metacognition 
Self-awareness 
Self-efficacy 
Self-esteem, Locus of control, Growth 
mindset 
Perspective-taking 
Theory of Mind, Mentalising 
Social problem-solving 
Conflict resolution 
Grit 
(Direct links with Persistence and 
Achievement Motivation) 
Note: Chernyshenko, O., M. Kankaraš and F. Drasgow (2018), Social and emotional skills for student success 
and well-being: Conceptual framework for the OECD study on social and emotional skills, OECD Education 
Working Papers, No. 173, OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi.org/10.1787/db1d8e59-en  
 
Conscientiousness refers to, on the one side, the tendency of individuals for self-controlled, organised, and 
cautiously planned behaviour; and on the other, ambitious, persistent and dedicated effort in achieving 
personal goals. 
Extraversion represents the tendency to seek the company of others, to initiate and maintain connections, and 
to feel comfortable in the presence of others. Extroverted individuals are also more likely to show assertiveness 
in social situations and provide leadership. They are often characterised by high levels of energy and zest for 
life. If extraversion partly refers to the quantity of interpersonal relations, agreeableness refers to their quality. 
Agreeableness refers to the tendency to be more co-operative, maintain positive relations and minimise 
interpersonal conflict. These individuals are more likely to show active concern for the well-being of others 
and to hold positive beliefs about people in general. 
Emotional stability represents the degree to which individuals are able to control their emotional responses 
and moods as well as the quality of their emotional states in general. Persons with high degrees of emotional 
stability will show more resilience in stressful situations, will be less likely to experience anger, irritation or 
sudden changes of mood, and will tend to have a better view of the world and outlook of the future.  
Openness to experience is reflected in two main aspects. One involves the degree to which people are open to 
intellectual stimulation in general, as reflected in their intellectual curiosity, imagination, creativity, preference 
for novelty and variation. The other aspect is shown in the degree to which persons prefer experiential 
stimulation, as represented in their appreciation of art, aesthetic experiences, self-reflection and self-
exploration. 
