36  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
As discussed in the previous section (see Trust and Co-operation), the Intergroup 
Prisoner's dilemma is used in Economics research to evaluate intergroup behaviours 
(Thielmann et al., 2021[89]). Players are divided into two groups. Each player receives a set 
number of tokens and decides privately how many to contribute to their group's pool. These 
contributions are multiplied and redistributed equally among in-group members but also 
negatively impact the out-group's payoff. The collective optimum (highest sum of points 
of all players) is achieved when no one contributes. However, contributing maximizes the 
in-group's welfare relative to the out-group. This dilemma creates a conflict between 
individual, in-group, and collective interests, thus creating a conflict between helping their 
group and the overall good of all players (Thielmann et al., 2021[89]). 
In recent decades, research on social cognition, particularly attitudes and beliefs about 
social groups, has shifted from traditional self-report measures to indirect measures of 
mental content, such as reaction times and unconscious responses (Kurdi et al., 2019[91]). 
Applications of these methods (adapted from cognitive psychology) examined semantic 
associations, showing faster responses to mentally related word pairs. This approach was 
extended to uncover representations of social categories, revealing biases in responses to 
racially or stereotypically related stimuli (Kurdi et al., 2019[91]). The Implicit Association 
Test (IAT) (Greenwald, McGhee and Schwartz, 1998[92]) exemplifies this shift, using 
response speed and accuracy to infer implicit evaluations, or spontaneous likes and dislikes, 
by measuring how quickly participants associate categories (e.g., local vs foreigner) with 
attributes (e.g., good vs bad). While implicit measures were initially assumed to assess 
stable individual differences, a large chunk of literature posit that they reflect context-
dependent processes, which raises the question of the link between IAT-like test results and 
real-life behaviours – see for example (Elder, Wilson and Calanchini, 2023[93]).  
However, several other tools have been developed, inspired by this approach, and use a 
proxy to infer implicit/unconscious prejudice biases, especially towards outer groups. For 
example, Degner and Wentura (2008[36]) used an adaptation of the Extrinsic Affective 
Simon Task to assess behaviour towards groups of people perceived as ingroups or 
outgroups (De Houwer, 2003[94]). In this type of reaction time task (see Figure 4.3. Image 
representing an Extrinsic Affective Simon Task), participants are presented with white 
words to classify on the basis of stimulus valence (for example, positive words to blue 
button and negative words to yellow button) and coloured words to classify on the basis of 
colour (blue words to blue button, yellow words to yellow button). On trials where the word 
refers to a positive target concept (in this case, stereotypical names of the participant’s 
culturally similar in-group), performance is superior when the words are in the colour 
associated with the positive button colour. The opposite is true for trials in which the word 
represents a negative target concept (in this case, stereotypical names of the participant’s 
culturally distinct out-group). Their results showed that stereotypical names of a culturally 
distinct out-group were judged more negatively than stereotypical names of a culturally 
similar in-group, and that several measures of task performance significantly correlated 
with measures of explicit prejudice. However, this correlation was moderated by 
participants' motivation to control their expression of prejudice (Kurdi et al., 2019[91]). 
