50  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
questions lead to the same answer). This allows to value questions differently and generate 
a measure of Curiosity. A critical element of the game mechanics was the decision not to 
add any external reward, like a trophy or point, as to guarantee that Curiosity was driven 
by a sense of internal reward, an intrinsic drive to know regardless of compensation. 
Interestingly, the researchers (Tor and Gordon, 2020[137]) found that level of Curiosity of 
the students was independent of their age, gender, and perceived intelligence. However, 
one clear limitation of this study is its demographic population, a group of “talented and 
gifted middle schoolers”, which, as the authors recognise, are expected to have high levels 
of Curiosity, which conditions the generalisation of any conclusions to the wider student 
population. This study did not contrast the game performance with self-reports on 
perceived Curiosity but collected questionnaires from teachers as an external validation. A 
correlation was found between Specificity of the questions asked, as assessed by the game, 
and the teacher’s reports of their students’ Curiosity. Within this group of high achieving 
students, those who are perceived by teachers as highly curious chose highly specific 
questions in the later stages of the game. 
4.3.5. VESIP – Perspective-taking / Social problem-solving / Self-efficacy 
Navigating the social world in a successful way requires the ability to understand those 
around us, their particular perspectives, thoughts and emotions, which can be ambiguous 
or even contradictory. In social scenarios, we are often asked or expected to appease 
tensions, help solve a conflict or choose the most prosocial course of action (Doesum, Van 
Lange and Van Lange, 2013[138]). Thus, it is critical to “read the room” or, in other words, 
to recognise, disentangle and appreciate the different contexts that underlie each person’s 
intentions and behaviours, so that sound judgements can be made. This ability for Social 
problem-solving has been explored in the game VESIP (Virtual Environment for Social 
Information Processing), aimed at children between the ages of 8 and 12 (Russo-Ponsaran 
et al., 2018[139]). In the game, children embody a fully customisable avatar and are 
confronted with challenging social situations, which are presented in a 3D virtual school 
environment where other virtual child characters interact, in settings such a classroom, a 
cafeteria or a playground (see Figure 4.8). Children face ten different social situations, 
which include ambiguous provocation, bullying, compromise or social initiation scenarios, 
where the other characters are voiced by age-appropriate actors to provide extra realism 
and increase engagement. When presented with these different social scenarios, players can 
choose between different options, regarding how they perceive the problem they observe 
and the intent they attribute to the actions of other children in the scene (taps into 
Perspective-taking). Then, they must choose how they want the situation to turn out, 
ranging from antisocial to more positive, prosocial behaviours, which assesses their Social 
problem-solving skills. For example, in a bullying scenario, they can decide, in ascending 
order of prosocial behaviour, whether they prefer retribution, avoidance, mediation from 
others or a direct and constructive conversation, to deal with the situation. They are also 
asked the extent to which they believe then can actually go through with the course of 
action they chose, which taps into the skill Self-efficacy, in a scale from “not at all sure” 
to “very sure”. 
 
 
