EDU/WKP(2024)11  33 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
geometric shapes enacting a social drama (like a domestic fight between two larger 
triangles representing the parents and a smaller triangle representing the child, for 
example). It reduces verbal and cognitive demands (and to a certain extent, culturally 
dependent environmental information) and presents multiple-choice questions about the 
actions and emotional intents depicted in the animation. The Video-Social-Emotional 
Information Processing (V-SEIP) (Coccaro et al., 2017[81]) is a clinical psychology task 
that uses clips of socially ambiguous situations featuring aversive actions, either overt or 
relational aggression, to test participants’ ability to read the situation and correctly assess 
the intentions of the depicted characters (in the general population and in patients with 
identified violent behaviour5). Participants rate the actions of a character with whom they 
identify. They summarise the clips and then answer questions assessing hostile, benevolent 
and instrumental attributions and their own emotional reactions. They also rate their 
agreement with different response strategies shown in subsequent videos, which can be 
considered a measure of Social problem-solving (see Social problem-solving). 
Finally, some task-based assessments focus on Affective empathy. The Facial Emotion 
Recognition and Empathy Test (FERET) (Coskun, 2019[82]) and the Multifaceted 
Empathy Test (MET) (Dziobek et al., 2008[83]) are two computerised tasks that assess both 
Cognitive and Affective empathy in response to a series of emotionally charged facial 
expressions. The design of both tests is quite similar. Participants are presented with a series 
of pictures and tested on their ability to (1) identify the emotion depicted (Emotion 
recognition), (2) display an appropriate empathic response by sharing the same feeling 
(Affective empathy). However, while the FERET assumes that facial Emotion 
recognition/Cognitive empathy is a precursor to Affective empathy, this is not the case for 
the MET (which originally allowed for the differentiation of deficits in Cognitive empathy 
from typically functioning Affective empathy in children with autism spectrum disorders). 
In the FERET, participants first identify an emotion in a picture (coloured drawing of a 
face), then imagine how they would feel if a classmate displayed that emotion, and finally 
choose one of three emotional response options provided (coloured drawings of faces). This 
assessment has been tested for internal consistency, but not for construct or criterion 
validity, on 7–10-year-old children. The MET and the MET-J were originally designed to 
differentiate empathy components in adolescents aged 10-17 years with autism spectrum 
disorder or conduct disorder (Poustka et al., 2008[84]). The items consist of photographs 
depicting individuals of different genders and ages in emotionally charged situations with 
rich contexts (e.g., a hospital room, a bicycle race) in which other individuals are also seen. 
Participants are asked to identify the emotion presented (Cognitive empathy), but also to 
rate their level of emotional arousal in response to each stimulus using a Likert scale 
(implicit measure of Affective Empathy). The MET has been tested for reliability and 
construct and criterion validity (to measure of social behaviour and social engagement), 
but the validity correlations were weak and internal consistency estimates were low. While 
the MET and MET-J are mostly used with clinical populations, they use photorealistic 
pictures in ecologically rich contexts compared to the FERET. These tests are more 
ecologically valid (especially the MET and MET-J, as they use realistic stimuli, including 
complex emotions and contexts) and mitigate potential social desirability biases carried by 
self-report measures of empathy, as they do not rely as heavily on the level of insight an 
individual has into their own emotions (Drimalla et al., 2019[67]). 
 
5 These constructs fit into a theory of aggression that posits that cognitive processes such as 
attribution of others’ intentions and response evaluation of possible response options influence 
whether an individual will behave aggressively in a given situation (Coccaro et al., 2017[81]). 
