48  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
4.3.3. Circuit Runner – Co-operation 
As detailed above, Physics Playground assessed Co-operation by relying on the interaction 
between three students, playing different roles in turns, to achieve a common goal. Other 
games, such as Circuit Runner (Stoeffler et al., 2020[135]), have attempted to assess Co-
operation by designing a narrative-driven world, where the player interacts and 
collaborates with virtual characters. In Circuit Runner, a game tested in middle school 
students (Polyak, von Davier and Peterschmidt, 2017[136]) and in adults (Stoeffler et al., 
2020[135]), the interface is a 3D virtual world, where the player must enter a maze and the 
virtual agent narratively stays a base location, in possession of key information and 
resources for the game to proceed. This interdependence is crucial to navigate the map and 
overcome the challenges and, thus, requires Co-operation skills, or collaborative problem-
solving skills, as the authors frame it. While navigating the maze, the players face problems, 
such as barriers or doors, that requires specific dialogue interactions or strategic transfers 
of power with the virtual agent, via a chatbox, for the solutions to be obtained (see 
Figure 4.6).  
Figure 4.6. Screenshot from Circuit Runner 
 
Note: In Circuit Runner, players interact with virtual agents and are prompted to collaborate with them via a 
chatbox in order to navigate a maze and solve challenges. These virtual agents are in possession of key 
information and resources which are indispensable to the game progression, requiring specific dialogue choices 
and transfers of power so that solutions are effective. The players’ actions and dialogue choices can be extracted 
and analysed to inform about their collaborative skills. 
Source: Adapted from (Stoeffler et al., 2020[135]), “Gamified performance assessment of collaborative problem 
solving skills”, Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 104, http://dx.doi.org/110.1016/j.chb.2019.05.033   
It is the dialogue choices and the pattern of actions the player chooses to do based on the 
information provided by the virtual agent, that data can be collected on sub-skills, such as 
perspective-taking, goal-oriented behaviour or strategy, which collectively form a score on 
the co-operation skill of the player. Regarding validation metrics, the game shows high 
internal consistency and some relevant convergent validity with external measurements. 
This includes statistically significant positive correlations, even if low level, between the 
player’s behaviours in the game and both their self-reports and performance in SJTs, 
assessing their co-operative behaviours (Stoeffler et al., 2020[135]). 
