60  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
virtual characters, who have pre-established personality traits and competences occupying 
explicit roles in the ship. The game has multiple situations, each composed of several 
episodes and corresponding tasks. Crucially, at the end of each situation, the players are 
asked to assess how they feel about themselves, by also observing how the other virtual 
members of the team report about their emotional state, as to assess Self-esteem. Self-
efficacy, on the other hand, is assessed by asking players to evaluate their perception of 
efficacy regarding their own game performance, contrasting this data with actual 
performance indicators, such as reaction times or number of completed tasks. Researchers 
found the in-game responses were strong predictors of the self-reported Self-efficacy but 
low predictors of self-reported Self-esteem. 
In conclusion, VR and AR technologies increase engagement, can improve learning 
outcomes and enhance cognitive and emotional engagement by presenting audiovisual 
stimuli in contextualised environments where higher immersion contributes to greater 
ecological validity. However, although affordability has increased, challenges with costly 
equipment that guarantee equitable access are still relevant. The issue with costs and 
feasibility is especially pertinent when considering VR and AR implementation for 
thousands of students in school settings, in order to enforce large-scale assessments. 
Moreover, structural problems of using these technologies, such as cybersickness or the 
high cognitive load required to familiarise oneself with the equipment and the immersive 
digital stimuli, still require attention (AlGerafi et al., 2023[175]; Rappa et al., 2022[154]). Also, 
specifically regarding the assessment of SES, no clear studies seem to compare the 
difference of a game-based assessment, in its VR and non-VR forms. 
Therefore, it is at this point difficult to conclude whether behaviours in immersive virtual 
environments constitute better representations of daily real-life actions and choices, when 
compared to the behaviours in simpler game-based assessments, which can be played on a 
two-dimensional screen. Benefiting from an intense technological advancement, VR and 
AR technologies hold great promise for the coming years, however current limitations and 
less consolidated scientific validity still condition their use to assess SES. 
5.3. Artificial intelligence applications 
The integration of AI into the assessment of SES could represent a significant leap forward 
from traditional methods. Many major recent breakthroughs in data-driven AI technologies 
were enabled by advances in Deep Learning. These breakthroughs in various AI fields, 
including machine learning, natural language processing, computer vision, robotics and 
knowledge representation and reasoning offer innovative ways to analyse personal 
characteristics (Tuomi, 2022[19]). These technologies analyse complex verbal and written 
communication, facial expressions, and body language to identify social cues and emotions, 
and attempt to infer emotional states, personality traits, or SES (Beyan et al., 2021[17]). In 
the context of assessments, three main AI use cases can be distinguished: 
• 
In assessment design, generative AI technologies can assist in creating interactive 
and immersive tasks and games, by producing text, audio, images, or even video. 
This can make assessments more responsive to user input and more realistic, for 
example, through chatbots and avatars, but also to reduce costs and time related to 
the assessment development. 
• 
In assessment analytics, predictive AI can be used to infer emotional states, skills, 
or personality traits, from data collected in dedicated assessments. 
• 
AI can be used for skills inferencing, which involves inferring skills from vast and 
unstructured data sources that may not have been initially designed for that purpose. 
