62  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
et al., 2023[195]; Mehta et al., 2020[193]). Even though these machine learning models are 
currently applied to personality traits, there are explorations of these models to detect SES, 
such as Emotion recognition (Dai and Ke, 2022[196]; Terhürne et al., 2022[197]).  
AI tools developed from research in affective computing and social signal processing are 
being applied in various contexts. For instance, in educational settings, AI has been utilised 
to analyse learning analytics. The interactions of students with learning platforms and the 
resulting trace data have been used to infer the Big Five personality traits of students (Mehta 
et al., 2020[193]). This data-driven approach also helps to identify individual learning 
strategies, enhancing personalised learning experiences (Kim and Kim, 2020[198]). The 
application of AI in education could foster the continuous monitoring of SES and other 
competencies, including motivation, emotion, and social interaction skills, offering a 
holistic view of student development (Tuomi, 2022[19]). Other examples of AI application 
to infer SES outside of educational contexts include automated assessments in profession 
recruitment processes, namely by using interactive scenarios. Many tools have been 
developed to automatically assess communication skills and behavioural aspects 
effectively, offering insights into personality, dominance, and leadership under various 
contexts (Rasipuram and Jayagopi, 2020[199]). These applications underscore AI's ability to 
process large-scale behavioural data, a task traditionally challenging for human annotation 
abilities due to its time-consuming and expensive nature.  
Although automatic skill and personality prediction have been extensively studied in 
various scenarios, there are still several open research questions that need to be addressed 
(Rasipuram and Jayagopi, 2020[199]), starting with the question of whether these new AI 
applications measure skills, traits, or both. Further research should also explore the 
connections between personality, communication and social skills, dominance, or 
leadership in different contexts, test the most effective scenarios for predicting individual 
personality traits or SES, and identify the independent factors that explain good 
performance in different skill sets. Do models developed in laboratory situations can be 
generalised to the real world, where there is diversity in terms of people, culture, sensing, 
and computing platforms? These unanswered questions have significant implications for 
the use of these tools on a larger scale, particularly in sensitive contexts such as education. 
5.3.2. Challenges, limitations and ethical considerations 
The deployment of AI in SES assessment is not without its challenges. Indeed, despite its 
potential, the AI-driven assessment of SES faces challenges concerning accuracy, 
reliability, cultural sensitivity, and privacy. The effectiveness of automatic analysis hinges 
on data quality, data annotation for model training, and the integration of information from 
multiple modalities (Rasipuram and Jayagopi, 2020[199]). It also strongly depends on the 
quality and diversity of the data used for the training of the AI model (Chen, 2023[200]). 
This has several implications. 
First, AI's interpretation of emotional and social cues can vary widely, raising questions 
about the consistency and reliability of such assessments. For example, reported prediction 
accuracy rates of tools for automatic emotion recognition in children range from 65% in 
some publications to over 80% in others (Dai and Ke, 2022[196]), which can be considered 
both high and very low accuracy, depending on the stakes of the assessment and the use of 
the data. Cultural and contextual variations pose additional complexities, requiring AI 
systems to be adaptable and nuanced in their analysis. Ethnicity (Corrigan et al., 2023[201]), 
gender (Gross, 2023[202]), socioeconomic status and other sociodemographic-related biases 
in recognition and performance predictions (Khan, 2023[203]), due to biases in training data 
pools among others, have been repeatedly flagged in tools used in various contexts, from 
human resources and recruitment (Chen, 2023[200]) to healthcare (Timmons et al., 2023[204]) 
