28  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
20-minute task, aimed at mirroring real-world conflicts between academic work and digital 
distractions, presents participants with a split-screen interface. They can choose to solve 
single-digit subtraction problems, enhancing math skills, or divert to leisure activities like 
watching short YouTube videos or playing Tetris. Although participants can switch 
between tasks, they are limited to one activity at a time. The task emphasises the utility of 
practicing basic math for improving problem-solving skills, while also allowing the 
freedom to engage in entertainment, thereby presenting a realistic scenario of academic 
diligence versus digital distractions. It is very similar to the Mirror Tracing Frustration 
Task, except the difficult task is here presented as more constructive and beneficial, rather 
than a pure challenge (Meindl et al., 2019[45]). The Academic Diligence Task has been 
tested for sufficient internal consistency, for construct validity with other self-control and 
grit measures (although the strength of the correlations with the task’s performance scores 
were small), for criterion validity and for fairness (Galla et al., 2014[48]). 
The Persistence, Effort, Resilience, and Challenge-Seeking (PERC) Task was developed 
to assess Mastery behaviours in primary, middle and secondary school children (Porter 
et al., 2020[54]). Mastery behaviour is defined as: “Seeking out challenging tasks and 
continuing to work on them despite difficulties” (Dweck and Leggett, 1988, p. 256[55]). 
Based on work from developmental psychology, four key components of mastery 
behaviours are identified in children and adolescents: Challenge-seeking (choosing 
difficult tasks), Effort (commitment to learning), Persistence (ongoing engagement with 
tough tasks), and Resilience (recovering from failure). Collectively, these components are 
very similar to the common definitions of Grit. However, as they are tested through a very 
short-term task, they also appear strongly related to individual skills like Persistence, Self-
control, and Achievement motivation. In the PERC Task, participants are presented with 
four series of Raven's matrices3. The initial set comprises relatively easy puzzles (80-90% 
accuracy) to facilitate success without reliance on pre-set feedback, enabling the evaluation 
of Challenge-seeking through subsequent choices between easier and harder puzzles. The 
second series provides a measure of Effort by featuring medium-difficulty puzzles (40-50% 
accuracy) and including feedback and optional tips. The third series assesses Persistence 
based on the duration of engagement with challenging puzzles (15-25% accuracy). The 
final series, mirroring the difficulty of the first, measures Resilience through performance 
after experiencing failure. This task has been tested for internal consistency but not for test-
retest reliability, convergent, divergent (although it has not been controlled for correlation 
with general IQ) and criterion validity, and on different populations (in the USA and in 
South Africa) (Porter et al., 2020[54]; Porter et al., 2020[56]; Porter et al., 2020[57]). 
Interestingly, all of these assessment approaches use very short-term tasks. It remains to be 
seen whether skills like Grit or Achievement motivation, which are characterised by the 
intention to exert effort over a long period of time based on long-term goals, in contrast to 
shorter-term and task-oriented skills such as Self-control and Persistence, can be assessed 
by individual tasks of this kind. 
4.1.2. Emotion regulation 
Emotion regulation is measured using two main methods: self-report questionnaires, 
which focus on typical Emotion regulation but may not accurately reflect one's actual 
 
3 Raven's matrices are multiple choice items that involve pattern recognition and are designed to 
measure a person's ability to form perceptual relations and to reason by analogy independent of 
language and formal schooling. In each item, the task is to complete the missing part of a pattern in 
a matrix of geometric designs. The patterns increase in complexity and difficulty, challenging the 
test-taker's problem-solving abilities and cognitive processing. 
