EDU/WKP(2024)11  29 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
ability to regulate emotions; and experimental approaches using experiential or 
performance measures (Mehlsen et al., 2019[33]).  
Experimental studies have predominantly inferred Emotion regulation from changes in 
experiential (subjective mental state/level of emotional arousal) and/or physiological 
emotional states (e.g., changes in skin conductance or in heart rate activity – see 
Biophysiological measures) following use of Emotion regulation strategies (Mehlsen et al., 
2019[33]). While in most experiential studies, individual differences in regulation 
performance are not compared with other key behavioural and psychological indicators 
(Mehlsen et al., 2019[33]), some studies find correlations between effective strategy use, 
particularly cognitive reappraisal4, with outcomes such as stress levels, depressive 
symptoms, well-being, and general cognitive functioning (McRae et al., 2012[58]). Because 
they provide deeper insights than self-reports by examining regulatory effectiveness of 
different strategies in relation to psychological functioning and individual differences, 
these studies highlight the importance of adding a performance-related component to 
experiential measures in Emotion regulation research. The varying effectiveness of 
different regulation strategies also highlights the importance of context and individual 
mastery in determining outcomes. A meta-analysis further supports this by demonstrating 
the differential effects of various Emotion regulation strategies, with cognitive change 
strategies, such as reappraisal and perspective taking, having the greatest impact on 
emotional outcomes (Webb, Miles and Sheeran, 2012[59]).  
Notably, many experimental approaches to Emotion regulation assessment focus on 
specific strategies put in place by the participant, such as cognitive reappraisal, perspective-
taking, or distraction regulation strategies, which limits their usage as assessment tools for 
a general Emotion regulation skill. Indeed, research shows that the adaptiveness of Emotion 
regulation varies with individual factors (e.g., age, gender, personality), situation (e.g., 
emotion type, intensity, context), and chosen strategies (e.g., cognitive demands, 
availability of support) (Ng et al., 2022[60]). While current assessments of Emotion 
regulation provide insight into regulatory efforts, more work is needed to capture the full 
picture of regulatory success. One Emotion regulation strategy does not fit all scenarios 
and more comprehensive assessments are needed. In addition, a recent literature review 
shows that while most assessments of Emotion regulation focus on negative emotions, few 
assessments explore the regulation of positive emotions (joy, interest, pride). 
Understanding how students regulate positive emotions is also important for their academic 
and personal development (Ng et al., 2022[60]). Overall, tailoring assessments to specific 
emotions and contexts can better inform targeted interventions. 
Stress resistance 
No task-based assessments were found specifically for Stress resistance, defined as the 
ability to effectively modulate anxiety and stress and the ability to solve problems calmly 
(Chernyshenko, Kankaraš and Drasgow, 2018[40]; Kankaraš and Suarez-Alvarez, 2019[39]). 
This skill is typically more easily assessed using biophysiological measures (see 
Biophysiological measures). 
 
4 Cognitive reappraisal involves changing how one thinks about or appraises a given (generally 
emotionally charged) situation. For example, it requires taking a step back and viewing a provoking 
event objectively, rather than immersing oneself in angry feelings and thoughts, as to control the 
outburst of emotions (Denson and Fabiansson Tan, 2023[219]). Cognitive reappraisal can apply to 
many different emotions and feelings. 
