EDU/WKP(2024)11  17 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
• 
Richness of stimuli: Only written content with no audiovisual stimuli / Inclusion of 
either visual (e.g., illustrations, facial pictures) or audio (e.g., vocalisations of 
emotions, voice recording for characters in the story) stimuli / Inclusion of 
multisensory stimuli, audio and visual (0/1/2) 
• 
Adaptivity: The assessment has a fixed script / The assessment script changes 
according to the player’s actions or choices (0/1) 
3.2.3. Reliability and validity 
Reliability refers to whether an instrument measures the skill in a consistent way across 
respondents, over time, or across raters. Validity refers to whether an instrument measures 
what it is intended to measure, and whether the inferences drawn from an instrument are 
appropriate (Cox, Foster and Bamat, 2019[35]). Each tool was screened for reliability 
(internal consistency and test-retest reliability), construct validity (generalisability and 
convergent validity), criterion validity (concurrent or predictive validity), and fairness 
(Socioeconomic, ethnic, and/or cross-cultural group comparisons). 
As a limitation of this review, we acknowledge that information on the reliability, validity 
and fairness measures of each tool is limited and should be taken with caution. The ratings 
are given for information only, to give an overall qualitative view of each tool. Due to the 
mapping purpose of this review, a thorough analysis of these estimates is beyond the scope 
of this work. In addition, the wide range of approaches and paradigms reviewed makes 
direct quantitative comparison of estimates difficult. For example, some measures of 
reliability and validity estimates may not be applicable to certain paradigm designs. And 
even when these measures are used, there are no absolute thresholds for reliability and 
validity estimates, so acceptable levels may vary depending on the type of assessment 
paradigm. 
• 
Internal consistency – the degree to which different test items that probe the same 
construct produce similar results: The tool has not been tested for internal 
consistency or no sufficiently solid internal consistency found / The tool has been 
tested for internal consistency (but low estimates of internal consistency are 
flagged)2 (0/1). 
• 
Test-retest reliability – whether the results of two consecutive administrations of 
the same test to a group of individuals are highly correlated: The tool has not been 
tested for test-retest reliability / The tool has been tested for test-retest reliability 
(but low estimates of test-retest reliability are flagged) (0/1). 
• 
Construct validity – whether the score from the instrument correlates with scores 
from different modes of measurement (e.g., self-reports) of the same skill 
(generalizability) or with scores from other similar instruments measuring similar 
skills (convergent validity) (Cox, Foster and Bamat, 2019[35]). Due to the lack of a 
gold standard, there is no clear consensus in the literature as to whether or not the 
validity of behavioural or biophysiological measures should be estimated in relation 
to self-report measures or measures from other assessment approaches (Degner and 
Wentura, 2008[36]; Mehlsen et al., 2019[33]): The assessment tool has not been 
 
2 By convention, a Cronbach alpha (α) of .65–.80 is often considered “adequate” 
for a scale used in human dimensions research (Vaske, Beaman and Sponarski, 
2016[218]). Other internal consistency measurements include for example split-half 
methods. 
 
