EDU/WKP(2024)11  63 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
to education (Tuomi, 2022[19]). These challenges highlight the need for AI systems that are 
both adaptable and nuanced, capable of accommodating cultural and contextual differences 
in emotional and social expressions. Another challenge is the limitation of the field's 
advancement by proprietary data constraints, making it difficult to compare methodologies 
or validate data against rigorous psychological standards through peer-reviewed 
publication processes (Suman et al., 2022[205]). Finally, the collection and handling of 
sensitive personal data requires strict privacy and security measures to protect individuals' 
rights and confidentiality, especially when AI tools are applied to data collected from 
sensitive populations (such as students and children) or in sensitive contexts (such as 
schools). 
5.3.3. Conclusion 
AI's integration into the assessment of SES may open a new era of insight, offering great 
opportunities to support individuals' development more effectively. However, addressing 
challenges in accuracy, cultural sensitivity, and privacy is essential for harnessing AI's full 
potential. As AI technologies continue to evolve, constant dialogue between ongoing 
research in academia and the private sector, as well as strong policies to regulate AI use, 
will be essential in harnessing their full potential for the betterment of educational, 
workplace, and healthcare outcomes. 
5.4. Digital footprints and behavioural measures from videogames 
In today's digital landscape, individuals leave behind a vast richness of data through their 
interactions on social media and within videogames. This data has the advantage of being 
readily available, saving the cost of creating an assessment tool, and of being collected over 
a longer period of time and in a broader context than what a specific assessment would 
allow. 
Digital footprints encompass the traces individuals leave across various digital 
environments, including social networks, learning platforms, massive online courses, and 
digital information systems, such as forums and blogs (Buitrago-Ropero, Ramírez-
Montoya and Laverde, 2023[206]). These footprints can be passive, comprising data 
accessible online without deliberate action, or active, created intentionally often for specific 
audiences. While some digital footprints are generated involuntarily, others result from 
deliberate actions such as publishing messages or exchanging information. Recent 
approaches have used digital footprints for psychometric modelling, to infer personality 
traits (Li et al., 2022[207]) or social-related skills such as leadership (Buitrago-Ropero, 
Ramírez-Montoya and Laverde, 2023[206]), for example. 
Another source of data comes from behavioural measures extracted from commercial off-
the-shelf videogames, not initially developed for assessment nor educational purposes. In 
recent years, the recreational videogame industry has embraced a more narrative-driven, 
choice-based format (Burrus, Rikoon and Brenneman, 2022[208]). Videogames such as Life 
Is Strange (2015), Detroit: Become Human (2019), or Baldur’s Gate 3 (2023) exemplify 
this shift, presenting players with intricate social interactions and dilemmas that directly 
impact gameplay and characters well-being. Players are empowered to make consequential 
choices that change the narrative of the game. Some videogames even allow players to 
revisit choices, encouraging reflection and exploration of alternative paths. This format has 
the potential to enhance immersive, contextualised and realistic SES assessment 
experiences within gaming environments. These existing commercial games have been 
used in scientific research to assess SES in a stealthy and engaging way, by extracting 
selective data on players’ performance and decisions. Their level of complexity allows for 
