44  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
4.3. Digital games 
Game-based assessments are a step forward in the way we assess behaviours, performances 
and skills, in children and adults. Through the generation of immersive, interactive and 
adaptive environments, which are engaging and often attempt to reproduce realistic 
scenarios, with storylines, dialogues and actions that mimic real-life interactions, 
videogames emerge as the new generation of assessment tools for SES (Kim and Ifenthaler, 
2019[122]; Oranje et al., 2019[123]; Shute and Ke, 2012[124]). In our review, we collected more 
than 20 game-based assessments for SES, games which not only vary immensely in their 
design, narrative and gameplay mechanics, but also in how they extract data for assessing 
skills. In this paper, we distinguish games from tasks as the former having an imbued 
narrative, a story arc with character interactions that players must pursue in order to 
conclude the game. Alternatively, when a narrative is not present, we categorise games as 
having interactive elements where the player has some freedom to explore the virtual world. 
Tasks, on the other hand, display simpler interfaces and are absent in narrative, requiring a 
more direct and explicit set of actions from players, without story or exploratory elements. 
Unlike in the previous subsection describing task-based assessments, where descriptions 
and discussions were organised by skill to offer an ample presentation of a large number 
of tasks, this section will be more focused. Given the greater complexity each game entails, 
in the following paragraphs we will present only some examples of game-based 
assessments. This will offer a balance between an overview of the diversity of these 
immersive assessments and more detailed descriptions of how some of these games work 
to reach their goal. 
The game-based assessments benefit from a great variety of narratives and visual designs 
which contribute to more immersive and engaging experiences for children and 
adolescents. Also, having the different skills tested in scenarios where tangible social and 
emotional elements can be incorporated, including with audiovisual elements, often based 
in human voice recordings, confers extra realism and, thus, increases ecological validity. 
The rich environments and simulations games can deliver are particularly useful to assess 
complex “hard-to-measure” skills, like co-operation or creativity, which traditional 
methods struggle to capture. Narrative-driven games also contribute to the paradigm of 
stealth assessment, where data is collected on children’s performances and choices without 
the overt feeling they are being evaluated, which counters self-presentation biases and test 
anxiety, better assessing authentic behaviours. Beyond these aspects, game-based 
assessments can usually be easily and independently administered in laptops or tablets, 
without the need for one-on-one staff guidance and often with automatic scoring of 
students’ behavioural choices and performances (Buckley et al., 2021[125]; Rafner et al., 
2022[126]; Ren, 2019[10]). 
On the negative side, visually and narratively complex games can be costly, due to the 
diversity of expertise and workload required to develop and polish all its aspects (Buckley 
et al., 2021[125]; Ren, 2019[10]). Furthermore,  due to the investment in ecological complexity 
where characters and narratives are built to tell a specific story, these games often require 
a significant time to be administered while only assessing one individual skill. On the other 
hand, increased ecological complexity and realism of stimuli might create more noise in 
the data collected, making it harder to isolate variables and measure specific, clearly 
defined skills, which can taint the assessment of SES skills (Clauser, Margolis and Clauser, 
2015[127]). Moreover, compared to more classical and established personality or skill 
measurements, many of these games are recently developed tools with not yet acceptable 
reliability, or sufficiently robust construct validity and criterion validity metrics, requiring 
improvement of some narrative or mechanical elements. Some games have shown partially 
acceptable psychometrics but are still limited regarding international comparability or 
