EDU/WKP(2024)11  31 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
and then rate the likelihood of their prediction. Often a distinction is made between 
Optimism trials and Wishful thinking trials, the latter contrasting ordinary positive 
outcomes with highly unlikely positive ones, to understand participants’ bias towards 
probable or desirable future events. Some instruments also vary the focus between 
Optimism for oneself and Optimism for others, exploring the comparative optimism bias, 
where self-related predictions are found to be more optimistic than those for peers. This 
makes it possible to explore how participants perceive and predict future events, balancing 
probability and desirability. 
4.1.3. Engaging with others 
The literature review did not identify task-based assessments focusing specifically on the 
skills related to Engaging with others, that is Sociability, Assertiveness, and Energy. 
Sociability is defined as the ability to approach others, both friends and strangers, and to 
initiate and maintain social connections. Assertiveness is defined as the ability to 
confidently voice opinions, needs, and feelings, and exert social influence, and Energy is 
defined as the ability to approach daily life with energy, excitement, and spontaneity 
(OECD, 2021[66]). 
4.1.4. Collaboration 
Empathy, Perspective-taking and Emotion recognition 
In psychology and related sciences, Empathy is commonly conceptualised in two facets: 
cognitive and affective (Drimalla et al., 2019[67]; Thompson, van Reekum and Chakrabarti, 
2022[68]). The first facet, Cognitive empathy, describes a person's ability to infer and 
understand the emotional states of others. The second facet, Affective empathy (sometimes 
referred to as Emotional empathy or Emotional contagion), is defined as an observer's 
emotional response to the emotional state of another individual (the ability to be sensitive 
to and to vicariously experience emotions of others). In other words, Affective empathy is 
the ability to experience another person’s feelings while Cognitive empathy, the capacity 
to understand such feelings (Quinde-Zlibut et al., 2021[69]). This conceptualisation of 
Empathy into two facets is supported by behavioural, neuroimaging, and neurological 
findings (Drimalla et al., 2019[67]). Recent evidence now adds a third important component 
to the multifaceted nature of Empathy, Empathic concern. Empathic concern can be 
described as the subsequent compassionate response to the perceived or felt emotions of 
others (Quinde-Zlibut et al., 2021[69]; Watanabe, Motomura and Saeki, 2022[61]). Empathic 
concern involves feeling sympathy and compassion towards others' experiences, distinct 
from Affective empathy, which is about sharing the same emotions. It might involve 
actionable expressions of that concern. 
Cognitive empathy is conceptually related to Perspective-taking (also called Theory of 
Mind – ToM) and Emotion recognition (Drimalla et al., 2019[67]). Understanding 
someone else’s emotion (Cognitive Empathy), especially a complex or subtle emotion in a 
rich context, requires the knowledge of this emotion and its related behavioural expressions 
(Emotion recognition), and the ability to attribute mental states – beliefs, intents, desires, 
emotions – to others and take their perspective (Perspective-taking). Depending on the 
definitions, these concepts overlap more or less, especially Perspective-taking and 
Cognitive empathy. For the sake of clarity and parsimony, Perspective-taking skills, 
defined as the ability to accurately perceive the thoughts and experiences and feelings of 
others and how these might differ from one’s own (OECD, Forthcoming[30]), are hereunder 
considered synonymous to Cognitive empathy (Cerniglia et al., 2019[70]). 
