EDU/WKP(2024)11  47 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Figure 4.5. Screenshots from Physics Playground (Creativity)  
 
Note: In this version of Physics Playground, participants are prompted to use a level editor to generate their 
own creative designs. The creativity of these designs is assessed by their relevance, originality, aesthetics, 
humour/surprise, and elaboration. Solving the puzzles requires that the green ball hits the red balloon, by 
interacting with drawn structures and obeying the laws of physics. The participants enjoy complete freedom 
when choosing the themes and the titles of each of their designs. Images A-C were considered, by expert raters, 
as creative designs, whereas image D was considered not creative.  
Source: Adapted from (Shute and Rahimi, 2021[132]), “Stealth assessment of creativity in a physics video game”, 
Computers in Human Behavior, Vol. 116, http://dx.doi.org/110.1016/j.chb.2020.106647 
Co-operation is another skill that the flexibility of Physics Playground design has allowed 
to be tested (Sun et al., 2022[133]). In this context, teams of three people work together to 
design effective mechanical solutions and solve the puzzles presented by the game. 
Working in groups of three, the players collaborate via videoconferencing in order to 
exchange ideas through spoken language rather than through chatbox messaging. One 
player is randomly assigned the role of the controller, responsible for the mouse interactions 
and the actual design, while the other two, the contributors, observe the gameplay live and 
provide contributions. Then, the role of controller changes so that all players have the 
opportunity to play the different roles. Since all team members received joint rewards in 
the game for their progress, there is a clear incentive to effective teamwork and 
collaborative behaviour, based on interdependence. In fact, under the umbrella of Co-
operation, multiple behavioural dimensions are being tapped, from maintaining active and 
constructive communication throughout the gameplay and understanding other’s 
perspectives, to encouraging others, solving possible conflicts, and negotiating solutions. 
In the case of this experiment, researchers observed convergent validity between the 
collective self-reported co-operative behaviour of the team members and the co-operative 
behaviour displayed while playing the game, which translated in better performance. 
Overall, Physics Playground is an example of how data from the same game can be flexibly 
collected to assess different SES, depending on how the gameplay mechanisms are 
designed and on the exact goal to which children are prompted. 
A 
B 
D 
C 
