42  EDU/WKP(2024)11 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
and a personal evaluation one makes about oneself”. While both Self-efficacy and Self-
esteem reflect self-evaluation, self-efficacy is more task-specific and malleable and self-
esteem is more general and stable (Chen, Gully and Eden, 2004[110]). No tasks assessing 
neither Self-efficacy nor Self-esteem were identified, although literature exists on 
assessments of task-specific Self-efficacy, such as in mathematics (Siefer, Leuders and 
Obersteiner, 2021[111]). It is worth noting that the nature of Self-esteem and Self-efficacy 
makes it questionable whether it can be considered a skill according to the OECD 
definition. 
4.2. Mixed batteries 
Mixed batteries are a collection of assessment tools that includes two or more measurement 
types, namely tasks, SJTs and indirect reports (self-reports from students, but also teacher, 
parent and peer reports). For this reason, usually mixed batteries have a larger scope of 
skills being assessed, covering multiple skills simultaneously with the potential benefit of 
offering complimentary validation for the same skill by different measurement tools. In 
other instances, although several skills are assessed through the battery, each individual 
skill is only assessed by one type of assessment tool. A clear advantage for the use of this 
collective tool lies with its scope and overlapping validation, which makes it an efficient 
method for assessing multiple SES (Walton et al., 2022[112]). 
SELweb is a well-validated mixed battery assessment tool, which includes different tasks 
and SJTs. Covering various skills, two versions have been developed, one for early 
elementary school pupils (EE), from ages 4 to 9 (McKown, 2019[113]), and one for late 
elementary school students (LE), ages 9 to 12 (McKown, Russo-Ponsaran and Karls, 
2023[114]). The EE SELweb version tests the skill Emotion recognition, through a task 
displaying facial emotion expressions which requires pupils to directly identify those 
emotions. Additionally, EE SELweb separately tests Perspective-taking and Social 
problem-solving skills, through the use of SJTs. In these, illustrated written vignettes are 
presented to the pupils and they are asked questions about the words and actions, as well 
as the true intentions of the characters in the story. They are also asked how they want the 
situation to turn out and which actions they would choose. Finally, EE pupils are tested for 
Self-control skills using a simple computerised task involving frustration and gratification 
delay, with the use of digital rockets and geometrical shapes. 
The design is slightly different for LE students, under a principle of increasing difficulty 
according to their respective age. In LE SELweb students are tested for complex Emotion 
recognition, being presented with illustrated and narrated stories of complex scenarios 
which elicit mixed or complex emotions, such as pride, embarrassment or guilt. This is in 
clear contrast with the identification of simpler facial expressions of happiness or sadness 
that characterise the EE version, so we consider the assessment of complex Emotion 
recognition as, in fact, an assessment of Perspective-taking skills. Then, like the version 
for younger students, LE SELweb also tests for Perspective-taking and Social problem-
solving skills using situational judgement tests. Using written vignettes that this time 
present students with more ambiguous and socially challenging situations, they are asked 
to make accurate inferences about the story characters’ mental state, choose a preferred 
course of action and how would they deal with the consequences of those choices. Finally, 
LE students were tested for Emotional control skills, by written vignettes asking them to 
imagine undesirable emotions and which strategy would they use to deal with those 
emotional states effectively. While infective strategies were presented, such as “punching 
a pillow”, effective emotion regulation strategies included actions such as “taking a few 
deep breaths”, “walking away from a situation”, or “thinking about the situation in a way 
that is not upsetting”.  
