EDU/WKP(2024)11  59 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
the potential benefit of these technologies in relation to SES, although evidence is not as 
abundant as the one that can be found for the digital tasks and games, discussed in previous 
sections. Many studies have also taken advantage of VR immersiveness to improve the 
ecological validity of tasks in research contexts. VR allows the presentation of 360-degree 
realistic audio-visual stimuli, that can be shown to participants in dynamic ways, allowing 
them to react to these in an interactive way rather than being passive responders to static 
stimuli. Moreover, the realistic all-around world that VR can evoke allows for the complex 
stimuli to be contextually embedded in an environment designed to provide extra social 
information, which conditions the players’ actions and interpretations, as it happens in real 
life (Parsons, 2015[183]). 
Some research has focused on enhancing audiovisual stimuli in VR in search of a more 
ecologically relevant emotion elicitation paradigm, for a better understanding of human 
affection. A recent literature review has identified a major increase in publications relating 
VR and emotion since 2015 and has pointed to the use of VR to heighten the emotional 
salience of emotions such as anxiety, fear, stress or arousal (Marín-Morales et al., 
2020[184]). The effect of these emotions is assessed through individual or combined 
biophysiological techniques integrated into the VR experience, such as HRV, 
electrodermal activity or eye tracking. However, this literature review shows that even 
though there are dozens of studies studying emotion in VR contexts, as of now very few 
attempted to find validation by contrasting results between in VR and in non-immersive 
environments. When validation was attempted, results point toward immersive VR eliciting 
more authentic emotional states, confirmed through self-reports and physiological 
biomarkers correlations (Higuera-Trujillo, López-Tarruella Maldonado and Llinares 
Millán, 2017[185]; Marín-Morales et al., 2018[186]). Two recent studies also showed 
differential brain activity when emotions are elicited in VR, using EEG techniques. People 
who were immersed in VR showed significantly stronger neural activations to both positive 
and negative emotions, than when those emotions were elicited by observing 2D screens, 
especially in brain areas related to emotional and sensory information processing 
(Schubring et al., 2020[187]; Xie et al., 2023[188]). 
A few tasks and games have made use of VR technologies to assess SES. A group (Geraets 
et al., 2021[189]) has used Emotion Recognition tasks, coupled with eye tracking, to assess 
the ability to identify specific emotions, contrasting photos, videos with real actors, and 
immersive VR environments with virtual characters, as the sources of the stimuli. Of note, 
Emotion recognition success rates were similar for the three variants, with VR 
environments leading to better recognition of emotions such as anger and surprise, when 
compared to the videos. To assess Perspective-taking and Empathy, another research 
group (Parra Vargas et al., 2022[190]) immersed adult participants in a VR environment 
mimicking social workplace contexts, where players embodied the role of a new worker in 
a company. Integrating different technologies, the researchers used VR for immersiveness, 
while employing complex eye-tracking analysis embedded into the VR headset and using 
machine learning to analyse behavioural data derived from decisions taken in the game. 
This physiological and behavioural data was then contrasted with self-reports for both 
skills, and eye-tracking data revealed to be the strongest predictor of both Perspective-
taking and Empathy levels, allowing for a stronger discriminant power when compared 
with the decision-making behavioural data. Gaze is, thus, a spontaneous and reliable way 
to infer about people’s abilities to identify, distinguish and interpret the intentions and 
emotions of others. 
Another example is Athenea, a VR-based game which attempts to assess Self-esteem and 
Self-efficacy, amongst other psychological dimensions (Giglioli et al., 2021[191]). It 
immerses players in narrative-driven story arc where they embody an astronaut in a 
spaceship, trying to find new habitable planets. In this setting, players interact with other 
