EDU/WKP(2024)11  35 
INNOVATIVE TOOLS FOR THE DIRECT ASSESSMENT OF SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL SKILLS 
Unclassified 
Economic games). The Trust Game is a sequential game involving two players, a trustor 
and a trustee, each initially endowed with an equal number of tokens. The trustor decides 
how many tokens to transfer to the trustee, which are then multiplied and added to the 
trustee's endowment. The trustee then decides how many tokens to return to the trustor. 
The Trust Game simplifies real-life situations of unilateral dependence, like online 
transactions, and has been used to understand the dynamics of trust and co-operative 
behaviour in different contexts. In a one-shot game, the trustor should theoretically send 
nothing, anticipating that the trustee has no incentive to return anything. It allows for the 
expression of beliefs about prosociality and motives like altruism, fairness, or greed. While 
the game’s simplicity is sometimes valued as a way to measure Trust in a purely abstract 
way, it has been widely adapted and implemented with elements such as communication, 
acquaintance, and repeated interaction to more closely approximate corresponding real-life 
situations (Thielmann et al., 2021[89]). 
Other economic games used to assess Trust and Co-operation include social dilemmas 
such as the Prisoner’s dilemma and the Public Goods Game. Social dilemmas are 
characterised by conflicts between immediate self-interest and long-term collective goals 
and are critical in understanding co-operation development. The Prisoner’s dilemma 
presents a scenario where two individuals, acting independently, must each decide whether 
to cooperate with the other or to act selfishly (defect) (Thielmann et al., 2021[89]). The 
dilemma arises because the optimal outcome for each individual (defecting while the other 
cooperates) leads to a worse collective outcome than if both had cooperated. If both 
cooperate, they receive a moderate reward; if one defects and the other cooperates, the 
defector gets a high reward while the cooperator gets a low or no reward; if both defect, 
they both get a low reward. This setup illustrates the conflicts between individual interests 
and collective well-being. Various adaptions exist, such as the Intergroup Prisoner’s 
Dilemma which looks at co-operative behaviours across groups (Thielmann et al., 
2021[89]). Here, each group decides whether to cooperate with or defect against the other. 
Mutual co-operation leads to moderate benefits for both, mutual defection results in worse 
outcomes, and one group defecting while the other cooperates gives the defecting group a 
high benefit but disadvantages the co-operative group. This paradigm is used to study group 
dynamics and intergroup relations, highlighting how collective interests and biases (toward 
the other group) impact decision-making and often make intergroup Co-operation more 
challenging. In that sense, this variation can be used to assess aspects of Open-mindedness 
such as Tolerance, on top of Trust and Co-operation (see Open-mindedness and Tolerance 
in the following section).  
In Public Goods Game paradigms, players decide how much of their initial endowment to 
keep or contribute to a public good, which is then multiplied and equally redistributed, with 
individual outcomes depending on both their and others' contributions (Keil et al., 2017[90]). 
Pizzagame (Keil et al., 2017[90]) is an example of Public Goods Game. This computer task 
developed for children and adolescents simulates playing with peers online, though 
interactions are with computer-generated players. The participants face three conditions 
based on the other virtual players’ strategies: co-operative strategy, selfish strategy, and 
divergent co-operative–selfish strategies. The task can thus measure the change in strategy 
of the participant based on the other’s strategies (conditional Co-operation).  
4.1.5. Open-mindedness 
Tolerance 
Tolerance is defined as the ability to be open to different points of view, to value diversity, 
and to be appreciative of foreign people and culture (OECD, 2021[66]). 
